SMITH LECTURE 1WEALTH OF NATIONS1. Biography2. General Themes and Agenda3. Causes of Wealtha. division of laborb.  capital accumulation4. commercial societya. moneyb. marketsBIOGRAPHYAdam Smith 1723-1790 ?An outline biography    Adam Smith was born in 1723 in Scotland, from a fairly well-to-do family.  He studied moral philosophy at Glasgow University when he was 14, influenced by some very famous teachers and writers who were part of the “Scottish Enlightenment.”  Hutecson, Hume.  Went on to Oxford, but left for home.  Part of it was that he seems to have suffered from troubles with his nerves.  Back in Edinburgh, Adam Smith moved in intellectual circles and gave a number of public lectures that brought him to the attention of the wider intellectual public such that at the age of twenty-eight he became Professor of Logic at Glasgow University in 1751. Shortly thereafter, in 1752, he earned the professorial chair of Moral Philosophy at the University of Glasgow. He acquired a great reputation as an interesting and animated lecturer. He did something which was pretty radical at the time: he gave his own lectures in English rather than the previously more expected scholarly medium of Latin. This was in a way a signal of his interest in the more mundane, everyday affairs of the world.  In 1759 he wrote a major work entitled Theory of Moral Sentiments, which was an international hit. It is not a work of economics, but a general account of the moral forces that influence human interaction, economic life included.  This made him famous, and got him a job as private tutor to the son of a duke.  He met lots of famous intellectuals and travelled all over.During that time, he was pretty bored.  So, in his spare time, he says, he tried to work on his hobby of economics.  That’s how he wrote Wealth of Nations – out of boredom!  It was published in 1776, the same year as the American Revolution broke out.  This is significant in that no country put his ideas into practice more than the U.S.A.  But more generally, the book he wrote has probably been one of the most influential ones every written.  It is not an exaggeration to put it up there – in terms of how much it has influenced important people making important decisions – with the other great works we mentioned less week, like the Bible or Homer.  This is a book that changed the world; it helped to push out an old world, define it as old,  and lay out the contours and ideals of a new one.  Let’s get into it.  1.  What is this book about?  Read the whole title, write it on the board: AN INQUIRY INTO THE NATURE AND CAUSES OF THE WEALTH OF NATIONS.1. NATURE of the wealth of nations.  Translate that into contemporary language: what does it mean for a country to be rich?  What are some of the alternatives?a. Natural Resources (top p. 2)b. Stored Treasure = cashc. Smith’s new answer: GNP per capita.  Quantity of goods and services produced each year divided by the population.  Quantity of satisfications (how much of the necessaries and conveniences of life) enjoyed by individuals in society.wealth is primarily dependent on creating conditions which allow human productive capacities to flourish.  It is a social product, dependent on social organization, rather than “given” conditions.  What is book about, then?  Understanding those social conditions which enhance and block labor, and understanding the consequences of allowing those conditions to expand.  Leads to:2.  CAUSES of the wealth of nations.  Each of the above conceptions of wealth leads to a different theory of what creates wealth.  * What if wealth consists in natural resources?  Well, if you don’t have any resources, you are either out of luck, or you need to get some, via military most likely.  * If wealth consists in stored treasure: mercantalism = exports good, imports bad.  Smith rejects both of these, especially the second.  We’ll treat it in some detail, because it was pervasisve in his time and to some extent in ours.  More important for now is to see how his revision of the concept of wealth leads him to identify new sources of wealth in those conditions that generate the most productive use of a country’s total population.  What are those conditions?Universal:a. Productivity of labour: p. 1: “the skill, dexterity, and judgment with which labour is generally applied”.  This is the subject of BOOK 1.  b. proportion of population employed in productive work.  This is the subject of Book 2.  Which is more important?  (a): read p. 2.Historical:These universal causes are conditioned by some contingent, historical factors.a. Manufacturing and commerce vs. agriculture. Which one is given precedent shapes how prosperous a country is.  Smith believes that agriculture is the basis for developing most productive labour; however, in European history, development took place first in cities and then only later in countryside, which, as we’ll see, he thinks was very inefficient and slowed/stunted growth in a way that was only finally being remedied.  Broader picture is the focus on modes of realizing higher productivity and greater proporition of productive labour in history.  Stress differences between universal and historical approaches.  Subject of Book 3.b. theories.  The theory that guides people shapes their action; a bad theory makes a country less likely to become wealthy.  Smith discusses alternative theories in Book 4.  One last piece of the puzzle to understanding Smith’s overall purpose in the book.  What is the unit of analysis?  Whose prosperity is he interested in?3.   Wealth of NATIONS.  The nation.  This is also revolutionary.  Previously, wealth would have been understood to be a property of the sovereign, that is, the rulers.  How much gold they have.  Political purpose, whole point of being in political power, was to get yours.  Patrimonialism is the term for it, dominant mode of politics for most of human history.  Focuses on particular persons.  Smith’s focus on wealth of NATION reforms how we are to think of duties of government in relation to the nation’s economy.  Term for this is POLITICAL ECONOMY.  Duty of government is to promote the growth of the national economy in the sense of raising the GDP per capita by increasing skill of labour and using population in the most productive way.  Subject of Book V:a. defenseb. justicec. public works and public institutionsd. taxesCAUSES OF WEALTH1.  Division of LabourWhat is it?What are its forms?Why does it increase productivity?What are its consequences?What are its causes?What are its limits?What is the division of labour?* specialization.  Read pin maker example, pp. 10-11. Example from my t-shirt business.  Everything that you’d need to do: come up with idea, get material for shirts, sew into shirt, print, distribute.  If I have to do all that, I won’t be able to produce many shirts.  But I focus just on the catchy slogan, let others do the rest, and, co-ordinating our action, we can all make way more.  What are its forms?* separation of employments* separation of tasksNote: may be others.  Keep track as we read.Why does DOL increase productivity?1. Improved Dexterity.  Get really good at ONE THING.  Pp 14-152. Time saving.  Don’t have to switch, get re-set.  Think about how long it takes you to get started working on your assignments.  Then if you move to a new place/task, you have to start all over again. P. 163. technological innovation.  a. Worker.  Focusing on the one thing can lead you to come up with ideas about how to do that one thing better.  If your whole focus is on coming up with catchy ideas (rather than having that as one thing among many that you do) you might come up with new office design, or brainstorming techniques, that you woulnd’t if that wasn’t your main focus. b. Machine-Makers.  When making machines becomes a special occupation, those inventors or more likely to come up with new and better machines, since that is their only job.c. Scientists/Philosophers.  Think all the time, able to combine all sorts of ideas that you might not otherwise connect.  If that becomes only focus, going to come up with better ideas,  some of which will be applicable to industry.  Smith thought this is where the steam engine came from.Consequences:Read top of 19.  * Surplus Value.  each individual is able to produce more than he needs., p. 21.   * Increase Commerce.  We can then trade the extra for all the rest of what we need – which will be a lot, since we have so specialized that nobody makes everything that they need.* Increased Interconnectivity.  Second para p. 19.  The more specialized production is, the more each product will be the result of massive amounts of coordinated effort by many, many people, most of whom will never have met one another.  Also read bottom of 20.  Raises question of how all this gets coordinated, structured, and distributed.  Answer will be through markets and money, to which we will return.  Cause of Division of LabourDid somebody plan it all out? No, too complex, and too hard to foresee before it happens.  Rooted instead in:Natural Propensity to Truck, Barter, and Trade.  WHAT IS IT?* Rooted in Reason/Speech.  The propensity to trade is most likely itself rooted in a natural human capacity, namely, the capacity to persuade other people to do things for you.  This capacity is not originally directed at anybody getting rich or generating so much wealth.  It is just a way for me to get you to give me the things I want.o SKIP.  From lectures on Jurisprudence: “It is clearly the natural inclination everyone has to persuade” which is “the principle in the human mind on which this disposition of trucking is founded…the offering of a shilling, which to us appears to have so plain and simple a meaning, is in reality offering an ARGUMENT to persuade one to do so and so as it is for his interest…And in this manner every one is practicing oratory on others through the whole of his life.” * Distinctive to humans.  Animals do try to get others to do things, by sucking up or fighting.  But they don’t converse and persuade and engage in the give and take of exchange – Read top of p. 23.  HOW DOES IT LEAD TO THE DIVISION OF LABOR?* Generates impersonal markets.  We have other ways of getting things we need/want, like kissing up and flattering or making friends or charity from neighbors.   But human beings are not very independent – we need lots and lots of other people to supply us with what we need, in contrast to other animals.  And there just is no time to make personal friendships with enough people. If I had to worry about what the salesperson or barrista thought of me, it would be totally overwhelming.  Read middle p. 23.  So pretty much all of what we want we get by offering trades to other people that appeal to their advantage, regardless of whether they are our friends or not – that’s what you do when you give money to somebody at the store to get your meal tonight.  Read bottom 23, butcher, etc. quote.  * Combined with self-interest plus markets --  specialization. Imagine I have to make everything I need – I grow corn, make shoes, bows and arrows, and funny t-shirts.  But let’s say I’m really bad at the corn, shoes, and bows and arrows, but I make great funny t-shirts.  If there is a market, I can go there, and trade my funny t-shirts for better corn, shoes, and bows and arrows.  If I’m smart about what is to my personal advantage – that is, if I want the best bows and arrow, etc., for the least effort – I spend my time making as many funny t-shirts as  I can.  Forget about the other stuff.  Then I have way more t-shirts than I need.  Take them to the market, and, if people want my t-shirts, I can get way more of everything else than I would have been able to produce myself.  So I specialize in t-shirts, somebody else in bows and arrow, etc.  Read p. 25.  This enables a differentiated society filled up with different sorts of people with different talents.* Coordinates talents and activities.  Renders them mutually beneficial.  Other species have a lot of differentiation.  Different types of dogs are very different from one another.  But their differences aren’t directed at the needs of one another.  Read middle of p. 26.  If we did not have the propensity to trade, we would be like this.  If there was nobody who wanted to trade with me for my great t-shirts or my extra corn, then I would never make enough of them to cotribute to the common pool in the market that could be useful to others.  And my special talents would never be useful to other people.  Likewise, if I try out some talent, like making diet squirrel food, and find that I can’t trade it for anything else, then I learn that that talent does not contribute at all to the common stock of things desired and needed by other human beings.   The market, created by our propensity to trade, puts all of our different talents together and makes them coordinated and useful to one another and signals which ones are beneficial and which ones are useful for others.WHAT LIMITS THE GROWTH OF THE DOL?* Development of DOL limited by extent of market – really a qualification on 4th point above – since markets foster our powers of exchanging which in turn foster DOL, extent and scope of market determine how far specialization goes.   Example: imagine there are 10 people I have available to trade with.  And let’s say that in general 30% of any population like my t-shirts.  Well, that’s 3 people to buy my t-shirts.  Maybe I’ll get some shoes, an arrow, and a hat.  But I still need to grow my food and have a house, and a lot more.  So I won’t be able to spend too much time on my t-shirts.  But let’s say there’s 10 million people available to trade with.  30% like my shirts, that’s 3 million people to sell my shirts to!  I can get plenty of houses and corn, and maybe an ipod and a wii.  Thailand story.  Emphasize the road.  Brings up key role of transportation in extending markets and those increasing DOL and with it specialization, productivity, and coordincation of useful talents.  That’s why leaders have been port cities.2nd Cause of Wealth: Capital Accumulationi. Book II, intro (349-351)ii. Book II, ch. 3 (422-439; 442-446)Now we come back to the second main question about what causes greater wealth: what leads to a greater proportion of the population being engaged in productive rather than unproductive work.  Smith’s answer to why this happens: where more capital is accumulated, more people are put to work using it.  Let’s start with some definitons:WHAT IS CAPITAL?Stock:  all the stuff I have.  My stockpile, so to speak.   Capital: that part of your stuff that you don’t consume but which you use to make more stuff to sell.  So if you’ve get 10 ears of corn and need to eat 8 to survive, the remaining 2 are your capital.  Their purpose is not for eating but for generating exchangeable goods.  HOW DOES ACCUMULATING CAPITAL LEAD TO WEALTH?More capital stock --- more DOL.  If there is little division of labor and little trading going on, people tend not to have much stuff piled up.  Read top of 349…”when he is hungry, etc….”. I pile up more stuff – say, I go from having some extra corn seeds to having a giant airplane factory – then it is possible to specialize more.  So DOL and accumulation of stock go together, making labor more productive.  Agribusiness farm is more productive then a pile of corn seed.  More capital ---- more productive labour. * Productive vs. Unproductive Labor:  productive is whatever adds value to whatever it works on.  Unproductive does not do this.  Or: productive labor enables you to trade whatever it works on for more than you would have done otherwise.  It gives you something tangible thing in the end that you can sell.  More productive the more durable, since that can be sold again.  Better to waste money on a villa or an artwork than on a big party. Examples of productive: manufacturers for sale (turning wool into a coat).  Unproductive: servants for your pleasure/consumption.  Kings.  Army officers.  Priests.  Professors.  Note useful/honorable vs. productive distinction.  P. 423.  * Capital generates useful employment.  Where you invest in capital, more people are more likely to spend their days working in an efficient, industrious, productive way.  If I have a whole bunch of T-shirts as capital, I’ll hire people to work on making them better so I can sell them.  I’ll think hard about how to use my employees to produce the best T-shirts.  My employees need to produce to get paid.  If instead we use our resources to spend all day discussing philosophy or writing poetry or debating politics, and then employ people as servants for doing this, then all of those people aren’t being used productively.  They get lazy and don’t produce valuable things to replace themselves.  The person who invests in capital is basically establishing a perpetual fund for supporting lots of people.  P. 432.qWHY DOES CAPITAL ACCUMULATION LEAD TO MORE WEALTH.Now, how does all of this help us to understand how the accumulation of capital leads to more wealth?a)  productive part of produce/total produce ---- more future produce.  The more of your produce that is used in a more productive way, the more you will produce next time.  How much of it is used in a productive way?b)  Division of produce.  Replacement, rent, profit.  Your produce is divided up in a few ways.  You have to replace your tools (buy more corn seed or t-shirts or whatever), pay your rent, and take whatever profit you take.  Whatever replaces your capital is productive. It either goes into buying more tools or paying wages, which are by definition paid to generate productive work.  Your profit and rents could go either way.  Landlord can just party with the rents.  You can go out to eat with all your profits.  Workers can take extra wages and go see a movie, but still, he has to do the work.  So mostly unproductive people get supported by rents or profits.  c)More replacing capital – more wealth. Rich countries have people constantly reinvesting in more capital.  Poor countries pull profits out of circulation and party.  As this increases productivity, it eventually leads to higher rents and profits.  Or: more capital, more industrious people, since there is more investment in generating productive work.  Less capital, more idle and lazy, since there is no work.  What quality leads to increasing capital?WHAT CAUSES CAPITAL ACCUMULATION?e)  Saving.  You increase your capital by re-investing it.  That means you save and don’t immediately enjoy as much.  This, in the long run, makes you and your country much richer, and allows you to enjoy a lot more.  Your savings, if you invest them, go to productive things.  If you just throw parties instead, the money is gone.  Note here that this sounds obvious to us, but it is major reversal of the value system that had dominated Europe and most of the world.  For who are the people who tend to take rents just for consumption and for supporting other people’s consumptions: the great lords, kings, barons who rule Europe!  Who are the people who save?  Industrialists, who are mostly disdained by the aristocratic elites.  Note the sacred language Smith uses bottom p. 432, to 433.  And 435: prodigal is a public enemy.  A kind of poetry of capitalist society, taking away the sacred meaning and aura from the old order, trying to make it seem like it naturally applies to the new.  But where does frugality or saving come from?  Why do we do that?f)  propensity to desire of bettering our condition.  P. 436.  Everybody wants to improve themselves.  Most obvious way: get rich.  Clearest way of doin that: save.Put a final arrow leading from national wealth to commercial society.MONEY AND MARKETSStarting to get a picture of what this new type of society, the one in which the DOL runs far and deep, looks like.  The name for it: commercial society.  Our society.  Modern society (at least in one essential component).  Read p. 33.  We are all merchants now.  Example: I’m a professor, don’t grow my own food, or make my clothes.  All I do is write articles and teach.  Do that, get money, and can get everything else I need.  If I couldn’t exchange, I couldn’t live.  Leads to new topic: conditions of exchange.  Before, talked about extent of exchange driving DOL.  But now: how can you facilitate exchange.  Answer: money.  And how can you efficiently order exchanges and distribute produce in a commercial society: market order.  a. Money and Markets (articulating abstract models) iii. Book I, ch. 4 (33-35, 41-42)iv. Book I, ch. 7 (78-90)MoneyWHY DOES MONEY EXIST?  FACILITATES EXCHANGE.  1.  Limits of barter. Barter is highly restrictive – if I want some pigs, and have cows, but you don’t want cows, very difficult for us to strike a deal – that is, to get to an agreement, make a trade, and get the DOL going.  How to solve this?2.  Money is a commodity everybody will accept.  Select a commodity to be money.  If I know that pretty much everybody will want a cow, it makes sense to sell my pigs for some cows, and then I can trade my cows for whatever else I want.  I don’t want the cows, but I know that anybody will take them.  That’s the origin of money, and, in principle, anything can serve as it – salt, cigarettes, whatever.  It is an abstract quality.  Relate to theory notion.  But some practical princiles have led to:WHAT QUALITIES MAKE FOR A GOOD FORM OF MONEY?3. a)  it lasts.  B) infinitely divisible.  Hence, often metal.  Lasting is clear enough – if you’re using salt, it’ll eventually break up.  Divisiblity:  if we use cows, then I could only trade a whole cow, so I’d always need to get a whole cow’s worth of stuff for it.  But what if I just want the new Jay-Z album?  I’d get a whole lot of Jay-Z for that.  So it’s better if you can divide it up.  Basically, our paper money do these to things better than gold.  Last as long as the government, and infinitely precise, whereas gold has impurities and measurement problems.CONSEQUENCES OF INTRODUCTION OF MONEY.But the introduction of money opens up a whole new possibility, or at least heightens it, in commercial societies.  4.  Use value vs. exchange value.  Read p. 41.  Things start to lead a “split life” between use value and exchange value.  People too.  Make friends to further career?  Art: like art to meet people, to get a job?  Education: learn not for sake of learning, but for what you can trade your knowledge for.  Creation of money TREMENDOUSLY expands that, and understanding social consequences is one of the other foundational topics in modern sociological theory.  What is the social structure of a world where we all lead “double lives.”  Can be alienation (Marx).  Can be liberating (Simmel).  5.  Use vs. exchange creates possibity that the market price of a product will be higher or lower than its use value.  This difference creates the gravitational forces that govern markets.   Creates the rules that explain how markets regulate how much of various products are produced and distributed to different consumers.  That’s the next topic: market order, the market as a way of efficiently distributing goods and services. So money facilitiates exchange.  But how to distribute products?  Who gets what?  Especially important if we have this incredibly complex, far flung order, millions of people interacting through long chains with millions of others they don’t know.  How can all that get co-ordinated?  Market order.Some basic principles of this order:Natural Price.  However much it costs to bring something to the market.  Includes wages, rents, and profits at whatever is the normal, going rate in your area.  Market Price.  However much I actually sell things for.  Market price often varies from natural price.  When it does so, people tend to adjust their behavior in order to bring them to line.  P. 82 on gravitational pull.  What are the laws of this form of gravitation?Law of Supply.  Law of Demand.  If demand exceeds supply, market price rises.  If supply exceeds demand, market price falls.  What happens then?  If market price rises:  more people get in the business.  If I find out that Christmas trees in buffalo are selling for double what they are here in Toronto, I’m piling up trees and going over there to sell.  Or if I’ve got land, I’m going to stop growing tomatos and switch to Christmas trees.  And then more people start working in Christmas trees.  And truck drivers shift their routes over to Toronto-Buffalo.  And brokers start brokering deals between Christmas tree producers and vendors. And the contrary can happen:  if there’s way to many Christmas trees, then I kick the tree people off my land (or raise their rent so much they can’t afford it), the truck drivers choose some more profitable route, signaled by the profits, the brokers do something else, etc. If enough people do this:  back to equilibrium, or the natural price.  The main thing sociologically here, since it is pretty basic idea, is to see how much human activity is coordinated here, just based on a few simple principles, and information about demand signaled by price.  Now, that’s how it is supposed to work.  But it doesn’t always work that way.  It does work when you have:1.  Liberty of motion.  Need to be able to move to different places to go into whatever industry is profitable.  2.  Freedom to change jobs.  Can’t have rules saying that carpenter sons have to be carpenters.3.  Good information.  If the prices you get are all off, don’t properly assess the value of whatever you’re buying, then you’ll pour a whole bunch of effort into acquiring worthless things.  Think of the sub-prime mortgage thing.What tends to block these these?:1.  conceal high profits.  If I know that you can make a killing selling Christmas trees in buffalo, and I’ve got trees and you’ve got trees, and I don’t tell you (which is naturally in my interest), then market prices won’t come back to natural prices.2.  trade secrets.  If I have a magic Christmas tree seed that allows me to make twice as many trees with half as much work as it takes you, when we sell our trees at the same price, I’ll be making higher profits than you.  But if you don’t know that or how I’m doing it, market price will stay high.3.  scarcity.  If there’s only five good Christmas tree growing fields around, that limits competition.4.  monopolies.  5.  certification regulations.  If only a certain number of people are allowed into a certain job, then that will keep wages and prices up. What are the consequences of market price and natural price coming out of whack?  We’ll get into it later, but the basic issue is that people are encouraged to go into those endeavors that are “unnaturally” rewarding, and this ends up skewing things so that other demands are not met. If profits too high, people get into that business because its easy money, don’t develop other talents or industries (investment banking example: everybody wants to go into that, but need quantitative skills in other areas); wages: if these are high in obsolete industries, hard to retrain and encourage to go into others.DON’T FORGET MAKE NOTE TAKING ANNOUNCEMENTTUTORIALS ANNOUNCEMENTESSAY #1 REVEALANNOUNCE READINGS AND STUDY GUIDES ARE POSTEDFINISH 3 B, marketsCommercial Society* Market OrderDistribution of Wealth* Original State* Inequality* ConflictHistorical Causes of Wealth* Natural Progress of Opulence* Inhibitorso Feudalismo MercantalismBegin with a review of last week.  Started out by trying to make sense out of Smith’s title as a way to understand the overall agenda of the book.  Then we went on to focus on the two major drivers of increasing national wealth that Smith identifies: the division of labour (which leads to higher productivity) and capital accumulation (which puts a higher share of the population into productive employment).  We can summarize those arguments this way:NOTE: ADD “SAVE” BETWEEN PROP TO BETTER CONDITION AND CAP ACCUMULATION. AND THEN COMMERCIAL SOCIETY AT END.Worth making a general observation about this as an example of general social theory: note how Smith manages to derive major phenomena like commercial society and national wealth from a few simple capacities that he attributes to individuals (the propensities) and then, through a few, logical but non-obvious steps, links them to to macro phenomena.  A great example of how theory can provide powerful models of complex processes.But stress again that Smith is not only describing something.  He is trying to show his readers that this world too – however dull it may seem compared to the old world of knights and crusades -- can contain its own heroes and its own demons, its own version of the sacred and the sinful. Note the sacred language Smith uses bottom p. 432, to 433.  And 435: prodigal is a public enemy.  A kind of poetry of capitalist society, taking away the sacred meaning and aura from the old order, trying to make it seem like it naturally applies to the new.Our next topic is the basic elements and governing principles of commercial society. MONEY AND MARKETSStarting to get a picture of what this new type of society, the one in which the DOL runs far and deep, looks like.  The name for it: commercial society.  Our society.  Modern society (at least in one essential component).  Read p. 33.  We are all merchants now.  Example: I’m a professor, don’t grow my own food, or make my clothes.  All I do is write articles and teach.  Do that, get money, and can get everything else I need.  If I couldn’t exchange, I couldn’t live.  Leads to new topic: conditions of exchange.  What makes exchange work?  What are its rules?  Answer to the first question is money.  Answer to second is market order.a. Money and Markets (articulating abstract models)  Book I, ch. 4 (33-35, 41-42) Book I, ch. 7 (78-90)MoneyWHY DOES MONEY EXIST?  FACILITATES EXCHANGE.  1.  Limits of barter. Barter is highly restrictive – if I want some pigs, and have cows, but you don’t want cows, very difficult for us to strike a deal – that is, to get to an agreement, make a trade, and get the DOL going.  How to solve this? Select a commodity to be money.2.  Money is a commodity everybody will accept. If I know that pretty much everybody will want a cow, it makes sense to sell my pigs for some cows, and then I can trade my cows for whatever else I want.  I don’t want the cows, but I know that anybody will take them.  That’s the origin of money, and, in principle, anything can serve as it – salt, cigarettes, whatever.  It is an abstract quality.  Relate to theory notion.  But some practical princiles have led to particular substances typically being used as money.  What qualities do they tend to have?WHAT QUALITIES MAKE FOR A GOOD FORM OF MONEY?3. a)  it lasts.  B) infinitely divisible..  Lasting is clear enough – if you’re using salt, it’ll eventually break up.  Divisiblity:  if we use cows, then I could only trade a whole cow, so I’d always need to get a whole cow’s worth of stuff for it.  But what if I just want the new Jay-Z album?  I’d get a whole lot of Jay-Z for that.  So it’s better if you can divide it up. Hence, often metal.   Basically, our paper money do these to things better than gold.  Last as long as the government, and infinitely precise, whereas gold has impurities and measurement problems.CONSEQUENCES OF INTRODUCTION OF MONEY.But the introduction of money opens up a whole new possibility, or at least heightens it, in commercial societies.  4.  Use value vs. exchange value.  Read p. 41.  Things start to lead a “split life” between use value and exchange value.  People too.  Make friends to further career?  Art: like art to meet people, to get a job?  Education: learn not for sake of learning, but for what you can trade your knowledge for.  Creation of money TREMENDOUSLY expands that, and understanding social consequences is one of the other foundational topics in modern sociological theory. Use vs. exchange creates possibity that the market price of a product will be higher or lower than its use value.  This difference creates the gravitational forces that govern markets.   Creates the rules that explain how markets regulate how much of various products are produced and distributed to different consumers.  That’s the next topic: market order, the market as a way regulating the distribution of goods and services to consumers. So the question now is: how to distribute products?  Who gets what?  Especially important if we have this incredibly complex, far flung order, millions of people interacting through long chains with millions of others they don’t know.  How can all that get co-ordinated?  Market order is the answer.Some basic principles of this order:Natural Price.  However much it costs to bring something to the market.  Includes wages, rents, and profits at whatever is the normal, going rate in your area.  Mention real price determined by labour, but don’t go into it.Market Price.  However much I actually sell things for.  Market price often varies from natural price.  When it does so, people tend to adjust their behavior in order to bring them to line.  P. 82 on gravitational pull.  What are the laws of this form of gravitation?Effective Demand.  I would like to have the new Tesla battery powered car.  But there is no way I would be able to buy it. So, though I want it, my demand is not effective and so is ineffectual.  For influencing the behavior of suppliers, demand has to be effectual.  How does it do so?Law of Supply.  Law of Demand.  If market price rises:  more people get in the business, and more will be supplied.  Price will fall back down.  If I find out that Christmas trees in buffalo are selling for double what they are here in Toronto, I’m piling up trees and going over there to sell.  Or if I’ve got land, I’m going to stop growing tomatos and switch to Christmas trees.  And then more people start working in Christmas trees.  And truck drivers shift their routes over to Toronto-Buffalo.  And brokers start brokering deals between Christmas tree producers and vendors. And the contrary can happen:  if the price is low, then I won’t be able to make as much selling trees, I’ll kick the tree people off my land (or raise their rent so much they can’t afford it), the truck drivers choose some more profitable route, signaled by the better profits, the brokers do something else, etc. The main thing sociologically here, since it is pretty basic idea, is to see how much human activity is coordinated here, just based on a few simple principles, and information about demand signaled by price.  Now, that’s how it is supposed to work.  But it doesn’t always work that way.  It does work when you have:1.  Liberty of motion.  Need to be able to move to different places to go into whatever industry is profitable.  If I try to go to Buffalo and sell my trees, but someone at the border detains me or puts a big tax on my trees, I probably won’t go there, and the price of trees will stay high.2.  Freedom to change jobs. If there is a law that says Christmas tree suppliers are only allowed to employ the sons of Christmas tree growers in their town, and there are only 20 people like that around, I won’t be able to expand my operations to meet the demand, and the price of my trees will remain high.  3.  Good information.  If the prices you get are all off, don’t properly assess the value of whatever you’re buying, then you’ll pour a whole bunch of effort into acquiring worthless things.  If the newspaper tells me Christmas trees are going for $20 in Buffalo, but they are really going for $100, I’m not going to increase my supply, and the price will stay high. Think of the sub-prime mortgage mess.What tends to block these freedoms and reduce quality of information?:1.  concealing high profits.  If I know that you can make a killing selling Christmas trees in buffalo, and I’ve got trees and you’ve got trees, and I don’t tell you (which is naturally in my interest), then market prices won’t come back to natural prices.2.  trade secrets.  If I have a magic Christmas tree seed that allows me to make twice as many trees with half as much work as it takes you, when we sell our trees at the same price, I’ll be making higher profits than you.  But if you don’t know that or how I’m doing it, market price will stay high.3.  scarcity.  If there’s only five good Christmas tree growing fields around, that limits competition.4.  monopolies.  5.  certification regulations.  If only a certain number of people are allowed into a certain job, then that will keep wages and prices up. What are the consequences of market price and natural price coming out of whack?  We’ll get into it later, but the basic issue is that people are encouraged to go into those endeavors that are “unnaturally” rewarding, and this ends up skewing things so that other demands are not met. If profits too high, people get into that business because its easy money, don’t develop other talents or industries (investment banking example: everybody wants to go into that, but need quantitative skills in other areas); wages: if these are high in obsolete industries, hard to retrain and encourage to go into others.  If talented people start making Christmas trees because they are so profitable that nobody goes into medicine, we have a problem. OK, that is the basics of the market model.  Later authors would flesh it out and work out other dimensions that are implicit in Smith but which he didn’t fully develop – comparative advantage and market model.  It is an enduring construct because it provides just a few elementary principles that can explain a LOT of complex human activity.  That is also a hallmark of a quality piece of social theorizing: simple model linked with complex phenomenon.  Let’s take a look at the model at work.  One way to assess the power of a model is to use it to explain something else.  Two of the basic questions of sociology concerns inequality and conflict.  Why do some people have more than others?  And what are the sources of social conflict?  Why do some groups have divergent interests than others?  As you continue in the sociology major, you’ll come across many accounts of inequality and conflict.  But one of the classic ones uses the market model to explain why some people make more money than others.  Smith gives a clear and powerful account of how this works.  We start with the groundwork for both of these, which is his depiction of the “original state” out of which the division of the world into landlords, owners, and workers grew.  This is what he believes eventually produces inequality and conflict.The Distribution of Wealth.  THE ORIGINAL STATEa. Distribution of wealth (using market model to explain inequality)  Book I, ch. 8 (p. 91-101; 110-117) Book I. Ch. 10 (138-151; 158-161; 164-166; 179; 185-186)  Book I. Ch. 11 (335-339)The question we are asking now is how the product of our work – the corn we grow, the t-shirts we make, the i-pods we produce, and the money we use to represent their value and to circulate them – how all of that gets distributed to different people at different levels.  The most central question that Smith is concerned with is wages – that is, the price paid for labour.  Why do some jobs earn higher wages (i.e. have a higher price) than others?But to answer this question we need to take a step back.  We need to understand the different ways in which the produce of labor can be used, and wages is only one of these.  There is also RENT and PROFITS.  We’ll come back to these.  However, before there was any division between wages, rents, and profits, first there was: The Original State.  In what Smith calls the “original” state of affairs, there are really none of these distinctions at all.  Read p. 91.  Before anybody owns any land, before anybody accumulates a stockpile of more stuff than they can consume which they use to start a business, before anybody starts working for anybody else for wages….everything you produce is yours.  You don’t have to take wages from a boss or give up what you produce at the end of the day; you don’t have to pay rent to a landlord either, since nobody owns any land.  That’s the original human condition, as Smith imagines it.Question: would this “original” state be a condition of equality?  Answer: no:  DOL would make things cheaper in the sense that it would take less labour to produce them.  But DOL does not improve production of all products at the same rate, so some would take a lot less labour than others, and these would then be produced at a higher quanity with less labour and traded for other stuff that took more labour.  And so the people who were in occupations that the DOL rapidly improves would be richer than the other people.  So, even though what Smith describes sounds like a natural state where everybody is equal, he thinks that inequality would likely eventually emerge even there.  The natural human condition, that is, tends toward inequality.  But still, we don’t really know that, since nobody lived very long without private property.  And once private property is introduced and once some people pile up stock, some people need to start to pay other people.  This leads to:Rent.  First for rent if you are on somebody else’s land.  Profit.  Second, those people who don’t have enough stockpiled to keep them alive until the next harvest or the next hunt need an advance, and they naturally get it from the people who have accumulated extra stock.  And those people will only give an advance if employing you will bring them something back – and that “extra,” the value you add to something by working on it, is taken by the owner of the stock as his profits.  P. 93.  So that is the origin of rents and profits.  Note that Smith doesn’t really talk about the original appropriate of private property, takes it to be basically a natural thing.  When we’ll read Marx, we’ll see a different view, according to which private property is far from natural; it is theft.  But let’s leave that for now.For now, we can see that, again based on a few simple principles (private property and accumulation of stock) we get the derivation of three fundamental classes of people that divide up the world: landlords, owners, workers.  This lays the groundwork for deriving a theory about inequality across and within these groups as well as conflict between them.Share of ProduceRentProfitsWagesOriginal SourcePrivate PropertyAccumulation of StockSelling LabourClassLandlordOwnersWorkersStart with:INEQUALITYSmith then goes on to talk about owner-worker relationships, leaving aside landlords for the moment.  What are the interests of the two groups w/r/t wages?  Workers want high wages, owners low wages.  Are these interests equally likely to be achieved?  No.  Why?  Because one class has a systematic advantage in the relationship.  Who is it?  Owners.  Why?Advantages of owners over workers:1.  owners can outlast workers.  They have a stockpile – that’s why they are owners.  In the end, they need their employees.  But can wait years.  Workers, by definition, don’t have much property, so they will need to get back to work soon.  Or starve.2.  owners can easily combine their efforts.  Read p. 95, top.  In fact, they are all silently in agreement to keep labour costs down, that is wages.  You don’t hear about it, since it is so natural that you don’t have to say it.  Read on in 95.  3.  workers combine with great difficulty.  Hard, since they have to work all the time.  And if they do combine, it isn’t in secret, but out there.  Since it is unusual, people notice it, and get distrurbed.  And since they tend to organize in dire situations, they take extreme actions, which often provoke resentment and fear from general populace and the government.  Note here how, even though Smith has rep as arch capitalist, he is calling out the evils of owners and highlighting the unfair negotiating situation in which workers find themselves.This leads to workers’ wages tending toward….Minimum Wage.  All of this combines to push the wages that labourers can earn toward the very minimum below which owners cannot go.  What is that?  Basically whatever it takes for a worker to maintain himself and his family.  So that tells us a baseline for understanding wage inequality – the bottom is whatever it takes to keep a working family alive, and that is where the price of labour, unregulated, tend to go.  Still, it does’t ALWAYS go to the bottom.  Sometimes workers are in a better position with respect to owners.  When does that happen?Rising wealth leads to rising wages.  What can push this minimum price up?  If the economy is expanding, that is, if national wealth is increasing, there is surplus revenue and surplus stock – extra money and extra stuff to work on – and this can put more people to work.  If an owner has that and needs to attract workers, then wages go up.  Alberta example.  Wages were way higher in Alberta than in Ontario, even though Ontario is overall richer.  What does this mean?  Wages are less determined by absolute wealth of a country than by whether or not it is expanding.  Rich countries often have lower relative wages for the working class.This starts to get us to an understanding of inequality.  But before we go into more detail, let’s pause with Smith to answer a normative question, a question about what is better or worse for society: is it better for a society if its working class has high earnings?  What are owners going to say?  Duh.  But what does Smith say.  1.  Equity.  P. 110, bottom.  2.  Growth.  Higher wages increase population.  Working class is able not so much to have more children but to keep them alive and healthy.  And higher wages are a sign of economic growth – new businesses and industries are being created, which increase wages.3.  Industriousness.  Healthier people are more industrious, and workers with the prospect of earning higher wages work harder.  Middle 114. when more workers can earn higher wages, their desire to better their condition is awakened, and thye are likely to become independent workmen (small business owners), and independent people are more likely to work hard.Might not look this way to masters, since when wages are high their servants leave them to get better jobs, and when wages are low, people come groveling to them looking for work.  The upshot is that everybody is better off socitieties where the wages of working classes are higher, since  this is a sign of growth and it induces workers to work harder and more productively.  Read p. 114.  These are the macro-level questions about the strucuturaly unequal relationship between owners and workers.  But there still are the more specific questions about which occupations tend to get paid more than others.  We know owners have advantage over workers, but which workers tend to get higher wages?  That’s our next topic:WHY ARE SOME PEOPLE PAID MORE THAN OTHERS?Read p. 138.Raises a puzzle for the market model: it seems that the model implies that, sooner or later, wages should equalize: if I know that I-banking is the way to make money, I’ll do it.  Everybody will do it.  And then wages should go down, and up for other stuff, and things should even out.  But they don’t.  Why not?  Two general causes:  “natural” (to the job) and “artificial” (having to do with policies).  Key point: use the market model to explain one of the enduring sociological questions: where does inequality come from?Natural inequalities.  5 factors:1. Agreeablenessa. Coal minders in West Virgiina make 75000; bank tellers there make 18000; financial advisor makes 45000 (other factors, but disagreebleness is one of them)2. Educationa. You are like an expensive machine.  Doctors, computer programmers, etc.  Makes you more productive, more valuable.  Get higher wages in compensation.3. Constancya. Friend who is a film writer.  You make a lot of money when you work, but then nothing.  Compensates you for the irregularity and pays for the immediate need by giving you a wage for limited hours that can take you further.  4. Trusta. If the job requires trusting somebody, like a doctor or a banker, you pay more to get a trustworthy person.5. Probability of successa. Lower probability can lead to higher wages for those who make it.  Take star musicians.  Everybody wants to move to NY or LA and make it big.  Everybody thinks they’re a genius.  But almost nobody makes it.  But romantic hope for artistic fame draws people in, the high wages of the people who do make it compensate for all those people who fail on the way.  The one star gets what is lost by the thousands of people who want to be a star, spend their time and money working towards that, and never make it.  On the other hand, average wages in these sorts of jobs are low, since so many people go into them with inflated hopes, making them willing to accept low wages.  That’s why musician earnings can remain so low – they’ll take it on the chance of hitting the lottery, and they always overestimate their chance of winning.    What counterbalances these inequalities?1. Long-established trades.a. Tech wages were way higher when only a few people had the skills.  Now they’re more like regular jobs.2. Normal conditionsa. New inventions, like ipod or manufacturing robots, may reduce demand for some jobs, like CD maker or auto assembly worker.  But people might be trained in being CD makers and auto assembly workers, and take lower wages rather than go through the burden of acquiring new skills.  So wages are lower than they would be.  Normal conditions are those conditions when people take whatever steps they can to go into the the best paying jobs.  3. Not having second jobs as hobbiesa. Another artist example: many people play in bands as a hobby, and therefore don’t need the income, and are willing to take less than if that were there sole means of support.  So it drives down pay for everybody.Artificial InequalitiesPolicies that create inequalities in wages of labor.1. Restricting competitiona. Licensing. Ontario government licenses, say licquor licenses. High profits and wages for whoever has them.  Price of wine and beer way higher in Ontario than in Michigan. As for the LCBO, over 150 employees make over $100,000 a year. 5400 employees are members of the Ontario Public Service Employees Union.2. Free educationa. If anybody can easily get trained to be a priest, then pay for priests is lower, as people take the free, easy education.  Same would happen in law and medicine.  But there are benefits, like increasing public literacy.  So not fair to say that Smith is total free marketer.3. restrictions on mobilitya. if there are two industries, one rising, and one declining, wages in the former will be higher.  But maybe workers are doing basically the same thing, need same skills (cd manufacturing vs. ipod manufacturing).  Laws may restrict people from the cd plant working at the ipod plant, perpetuating the inequality.  SOCIAL CONFLICTTHE INTERESTS OF THE THREE ORDERS OF SOCIETY, AND THEIR COINCIDENCE WITH THE COMMON GOOD.Seen how market model explains inequality.  Now want to also see how Smith’s general presuppositions can explain social conflict.  Original SourcePrivate PropertyAccumulation of CapitalSelling LabourShare of ProduceRentProfitsWagesClassLandlordOwnersWorkersInterestIncreasing wealth and productivityProfitsIncreasing WagesInterest aligned with common good?YesNoYesRecognize their interest?NoYesNoRead bottom p. 336.As we saw, produce is divided into three parts: rent, wages, profits.  Different types of people go with each of these: landlords, workers, manufacturers/merchants (businessmen).  Again, Smithis deriving social classes from the basic theory of where proceeds come from in production.  These become important in “civilized” society: that is, as commercial society becomes more entrenched, these divisions become sharper and more defining.  Now Smith is identifying the interests that go with each class:1. Landlordsa. Connected with the general interest of society.  Increasing wealth and productivity increases rents.  b. But they don’t recognize their interests.  They don’t have to plan, just collect.  So they don’t calculate consequences of policies well.2. Workersa. Interest also connected with general good.  Wages go up when wealth is expanding.  Owners may gain more from expansion, but workers suffer worse from decline.  b. But workers don’t see their interest well either.  No time to think.  Tend to be uneducated.  3. Employersa. Their interests diverge from interests of general good.  Profits are not higher in expanding economies, but rather higher in declining.  b. But these people are always scheming, trying to figure out best policies for expanding their profits.  But not for expanding wealth of the nation. READ 339, up to “absurd tax…”. Car companies in seventies.  Didn’t want Japanese competition.  Kept their profits high.  But then Toyota ame to U.S.  car prices dropped, car companies had to put more into innovation and better product for cheaper, consumers got better products for less, could use the money elsewhere, be more productive with that (even if auto workers suffered, everybody else, and economy as a whole, was encouraged to find other uses).  Also sugar lobby example.  Upshot is that commercial society is marked by basic conflict between employers/owners and everybody else.  However, it is very hard for everybody else to organize to properly control employers, since the landlords often believe that their interests align with the employers, and the employers are really good at lobbying.  Read end of 339.  HISTORIAL CAUSES OF WELATH.Moving to next topic.  So far we’ve been focusing on what we called in the last lecture universal causes for wealth.  Smith roots his theory in basic human propensities (to exchange and better your condition) and develops an argument to the effect that wherever and whenever these propensities are allowed to develop through their logical course, wealth will increase.  There is something like a built-in, natural tendency toward commercial society in his theory.  But we also said that there are particular, historical circumstances that impact the extent to which these universal causes are in fact effectual.  And since all of us live in history and in particular places, a full theory needs to account for how these universal conditions are modified by the particular historical situations in which human beings live.  This requires something like a case study of the emergence and realization of commercial society in a real place in real time.  Smith chooses Europe for his case.The logic of his theory requires a certain kind of case study.  Remember, his theory implies that, without inhibition, human beings will naturally move toward commercial society and increasing wealth.   However, most actual socieities have not in fact done this.  And Europe in particular was very poor for about a thousand years -- since the fall of Rome around 475 AD until relatively recently.  In Smith’s day, it was just getting going, and still was blocked on many fronts, which we’ll discuss. So his analysis focuses on whatever inhibitors have historically blocked the emergence of commercial society and rising wealth.  He tries to show how those inhibitors were removed and could be further removed.  Our discussion now will focus on two major inhibitors: 1.  The feudal order that emerged in Europe out of the anarchy following the fall of Rome.  2.  The misguided policies of mercantalism.But before we get to those inhibitors, we need to first lay out how Smith thinks society is supposed to develop, how it would naturally progress toward wealth if it did not meet these obstacles.  We can then understand the actual course of events by seeing how and why they deviate from this yardstick and figuring out what it took and would take to get them back on track.  Smith calls this:THE NATURAL PROGRESS OF OPULENCE.Agriculture/Raw MaterialManufacturingForeign CommerceFarmersManufacturersMerchantsCountryCityInternationalAgriculture ----- Manufacturing ----- Foreign CommerceFarmersThe two propensities, permitted to run their course, would have produced opulent nations, starting with agriculture, then, maufacture, then foreign commerce.  That is Smith’s claim.  Why does he hold it?Has to do with country-town relations. Why should countries develop first?  1.  Subsistence comes before convenience and luxury.  P. 482. 2.  Moral Claim. farming life is the superior life.  P. 483.  have your property under your control, less contingent, less uncertainty.  Leads to more concerted, focused, and constant effort (note about present crisis, uncertainty, and how it leads people to lose confidence and take less bold and committed action).  Also, farming life is beautiful and a source of independence.  Bottom 483.  This means that, according to Smith’s picture of human nature, manufacturers would rather be farmers, and if nothing blocks them from doing so, they would rather switch from being, say, a blacksmith to becoming a planter since that will make him more independentn and free.  Similarly, manufacturing is superior to foreign trade, since foreign trade means putting your property far from home in even more uncertain circumstances, so that is the least desirable and natural kind of existence. 485.  3.  Country-Town-Foreign Trade reciprocity.  The upshot, is that a reciprocal relationship emerges: Country: provides raw material to town.  Town: provides manufactures to country.  Town rovides goods to town for much less labor than they could do it themselves.  Town provides a market for surpluses from farms, the nearer and bigger the better. Artificers crop up to support the farmers.  Taylors, bricklayers, smiths, carpenters, etc.  Since the artificers need each others help, and aren’t restricted by having to plow a certain field, they tend to locate nearby, and form towns.   Town develops naturally according to how much the farmers can buy, and this is restricted by how much agriculture has developed.  So there is a natural connection whereby, without intervention, towns grow in proportion to the development of nearby agriculture. However, if all the farmland is already developed, or if it is really hard or impossible to acquire, and if the manufacturing base has been sufficiently developed so that investment in it would not be profitable, successful manufacturers will naturally go on to try to sell their products to new markets, usually in foreign countries.  This too is limited by the development of the other levels, and grows in tandem with the them. Read 484.  Without artificial intervention, the natural course of things is that towns increase in wealth in proportion to improvement in agriculture.  But something interrupted this natural progression in Europe, stunting its growth.  Progress went totally backwards: from foreign imports, to manufactures, to improvement of agriculture!  Totally reversed, mostly, Smith claims, because of anarchic situation that emerged after fall of Rome.  The values and habits that emerged in the process had long-lasting effects, were deeply sedimented, so much so that it could only be reversed through an unintentional process that led to revolutionary transformations in the society, without anybody really meaning for it to do so, since those habits had become so ingrained that nobody really would have intentionally tried to change them.  How did that work?  How did the European feudal system, led by barons and kings and lords who had peasants, dig its own grave?  Provides us a brilliant example of how major social transformation can and usually does occur without planning but through interal tensions in a social system.  First Inhibitor: European FeudalismNine Steps:1. Fall of Rome2. Warlord Landgrab3. Bad for Agriculture (say reasons why)4. Towns rise (say why)5. foreign trade rises6. manufacturing develops7. barons weakened8. agriculture develops9. modern commercial society.1. Rome fell.  Civilization collapsed, economy fell apart, people forgot how to do stuff, roads fell into disrepair, trade stopped, constant danger and warfare.  2.  Warlord Landgrab.  A few chiefs acquired VAST amounts of land, came to be known as Barons.  It was very dangerous place, and land was not primarily a means of subsistence or something to be developed.  It was there for power and protection, from other warlords.  So the whole, vast land holdings were passed down to the firstborn son, and they were not allowed to be divided up ever.  Primogeniture.  Entails.  Doing so might be fair and might make economic sense – there was just too much land for any one person to develop – but it would not make sense for political or military reasons, since it would weaken the Baron.  Made the landlord into a kind of “petty prince.”  Each little area was like a separate political unit.  Baron was judge for disputes, would lead everybody in war.  Could decide on his own if he wanted to wage war.  He could decide whether marriages could occur, and get peasant’s goods when they died.  They depended on him completely and personally.  This leads to a hierarchical society, sometimes called “patronage” or “clientist.”  Like in the Godfather.  Like Tony Soprano, giving out Christmas ducks, helping sick people, but making everybody depend on him, loyal to him personally.  Or the opening scene of the Godfather – man comes to Godfather for protection, offers a trade, a payment.  Godfather gets mad.  Says we don’t do exchanges. I’m your “friend,” you help me.  Later, I may call on you.  That is what it was like basically to be a peasant or one of the lord’s knights.  You are loyal to him, and you pledge to “help” him if he needs you, and that usually means that you’ll go fight if he asks.  Until then, if you are a knight, you hang out, eat, and train at his hosue or on his estate, and a peasant, you farm and basically kick up most of what you grow to the Baron.  Draw a network diagram, see my scanned version.  Note how the power of the system is that it can be combined and combined and combined.  Made feasible because the authority and loyalty just goes to the one directly above you, not all the way to the top.  So you might be a peasant in France and have a King in Poland, but it wouldn’t matter to you, since your whole life revolves around your lord.  If the King in Poland wants you to do something, he has to go through all the other levels, and you would be doing it not for him but for your personal connection to your immediate superior.  Supports some of the classical medieval values: loyalty, hospitality, graciousness, and courage.  But it:Hurts Agriculture.  This situation is NOT conducive to agricultural development.  a) Baron personality structure.  One reason has to do with the personality type cultivated by these petty princes.  Key link between social structure and personality structure.  They were warriors.  Care about their reputation.  Marlo example.  If they do have leisure from their fighting, not likely to use it working, accounting, bookkeeping – they hate that stuff. Gangster example, with bling. More likely to get great houses and have fun parties. b)  Peasants are unproductive.  Also, peasants weren’t going to produce much.  Basically slaves, don’t own the land.  Working solely to kick up to baron, live on whatever scraps they can.  Anything extra they produce, goes to him, so there’s no way they are going to work any harder than they need to.  No incentive to invest.  Also, they had to do a bunch of regular services for the lords, like fight, work on roads, pay extra taxes to the King.  All of which made farming seem like a pretty dirty business, that you’d want to get out of if you had any good sense.  Towns Rise.  That’s the countryside.  What about the cities?  They were in a pretty bad situation after Rome fell too.  Greco-Roman towns were made up of rich landowners who lived together for protection.  They were equal citizens.  Feudal towns: the rich landowners, as we saw, lived in separate enclaves.  Towns were traders and mechanics, pretty low status people.  But they did get freedom, and were able to incorporate as collective bodies, and govern themselves.  They got long term leases at fixed rents, and were able to cultivate their land and sell what they produced beyond their own consumption needs.  Towns became center of modernizing bent in Europe – Venice, for example.  How did that happen? Why?  Looks like it shouldn’t happen, since cities were dregs of society, and had initially no property, just like other serfs.  But eventually Kings started giving them their own property rights and rights to make their own laws and courts.  Why?  Take a look at the structural diagram.  Ask if you see any places where conflict and competition is built into the very fabric of the social structure?  It’s between the King and the nobles.  Why?  If King ever wants to get anything done, he can’t go directly to the base.  He is dependent on the nobles, who had pretty much total power in their areas.  This puts nobles and kings into constant competition, without any clear solution.  So, basically, King was always doing whatever he could to weaken the feudal barons.  What were his opportunities for doing that?  The feudal landholding system was pretty solid, couldn’t really fight it.  But could look outside the basic structure.  And so he did, and found the towns.  This  would be especially likely where the King was weak.  Then he would turn to cities for help, and trade them independence and landownership for support.  Strong Kings wouldn’t have to do this, and so cities stayed weaker in those countries.  Britian vs. France: part of explanation for why France has had a much harder transition to modern commercial society is that country lords stayed strong, and city was weaker.  In any case, weaker Kings would grant collective ownership to towspeople.   Lead to cities which stressed equality, as all citizens had equal share in owndership, and were equally responsible for defense.  They had their own property, which they worked on their own, and then sold.  They therefore also become hotbeds of the notion of individual achievement, standing on your own two feet, rather than reputation and rank, as in the feudal enclaves.Foreign Trade Emerges in Towns. More secure, townspeople could start to produce things beyond what they needed just to survive.  P. 512.  Towns get more productive farms.  They need to sell their produce to somebody.  The local Barons hate them, so that is out. So the townspeople started trading with foreign countries.  Coastal cities, like Venice, were favored, as they could carry on foreign trade.  The towns sent their surplus raw produce, like wool, in return for manufactured goods and luxuries, like wine.  Started selling all the fancy foreign goods to the Barons, since the Barons, even though they hated the townspeople and merchants, really liked their bling. Manufacturing develops.   Pretty soon, the towns figured it made more sense to produce some of that stuff on their own, rather than go through all the trouble of shipping it from somewhere else.   So they started manufacturing.  This is nature running backwards: foreign commerce, to manufacture.  But how did the cycle come full circle?  How did manufacture get to agriculture?Development of agriculture.1. Development of town extended market for raw materials.  This gave some encouragement for development in the countryside, since their was profit to be made selling stuff in the towns.  2. Merchants started buying land and cultivating it.  Read p. 520 for the merchant personality type as more industrious and more prone to capital investment.  Hint at “spirit” of capitalism.3. Reduced power of barons, introduced less personalistic, hierarchical government.  This is the key, really, since it led to a social revolution.  Let’s focus on it.When towns were small, barons were rich, but there wasn’t really anything that great for them to buy.  So they had great parties, which attracted a whole bunch of retainers (the knights in our diagram).  He was their perpetual host.  They stayed with him, and were loyal to him, obligated to him.  But to keep them, he had to keep on being generous to them.  These people were dependent on him totally and personally, just like the peasants, whom could barely pay their rent. But foreign commerce undermined this.  p. 525.  How?  The barons all of a sudden could buy fancy stuff.  That meant they spent less on their retainers.  Less people were personally loyal to the barons.  Yes, the barons’ money supported many people.  But in a dispersed, distributed way.  Each of the articiers had many clients, and so no single person controlled them.  Each of the barons bought from many people, and could not directly command all of them.  No direct personal relationship.  Decntralizes authority.  Not absolute and personal, more likely to be based on general principles.Use the diagram.Then, the barons needed more money, gave long leases to the farmers to generate more rent revenue.  Peasants were then able to cultivate the land, and sell the surplus, gaining greater independence from the landlords.  This led to major development of agriculture, and the great barons were basically insignificant.  They could not control their territory or their local population as they could before.  Became just one part of the total commercial system, in which everybody is interdependent on everybody else, no relations of personal dependence. Yes, thee is dependenc, but it is impersonal.  Read p. 529. On how this total revolution in social authority occurred, without anybody meaning for it to occur. Now, I’ve gone into some detail here, but the fundamental point is not one about European history. Rather, this is a great case for illustrating some general principles about what the notion of “structural change” means, and the conditions under which it is likely to occur (which later scholars in recent decades have elaborated and codified, but Smith already had anticipated). * Structural vs. non-structural Change. What is the difference? Structural change involves a change in the basic principle and shape of social organization. If some Barons became King, and the feudal system, and its hierarchical form, stayed the same, this would be a change, but not a structural one. New boss same as old boss. In general, if one group just replaces another at the top, then that is not structural change.* Elite conflict. Generally, it takes some division among people at the top of a social order for structural change to occur. In this case, it was King vs. Barons. But in general, if the elites form a cohesive group, it is very difficult to change the basis of a social order. * Loss of governing capacity. What puts extreme pressure on elites? It is when they lose their capacity to govern. This is often associated with debt. The government can’t pay its bills. We saw this with the Barons not being able to support their retinue of knights. But generally speaking, the opportunity for revolutions in social structures occur when state capacity is weakened, often by debt. * From the margins. Major structural change generally comes from the margins of society. That makes sense: the people on the top like things how they are! Note that “margins” here does not necessarily mean “on the bottom.” As we saw, in this case it meant “from the commercial classes in the cities,” who were not part of the ordering principle of the feudal structure. Often, people on the bottom lack the means to lead major social change, and it comes from an alignment with rising groups who have no place within the existing regime.* Unintentional. Structural change is often not intentional. Who wanted it in this case? Certainly not the King or Barons. The commercial classes benefited from it, but their intention was not to change society, at least not initially. The intention was to buy and sell their goods and improve their lot in life. The social world is so complex that it is almost impossible to predict how your actions will affect it. This means that in general big changes happen “behind the backs” of the people who make them. Of course, at some point it becomes clear that something big is afoot and then people can work for, or against it, intentionally. But at that point it is often too late, and the change has happened. This type of experience, of a social change that seems like an inevitable force, is something we will return to when we study Tocqueville. Second Inhibitor, the Ideological One: Mercantilism.Previous account was not really about application of a system or policy, but about unintended consequences of fall of rome, and of rise of aristocratic/warrior type.  Mercantilism is a system, an explicit way of organizing policy and action.  What is it?  Basically: 1.  wealth is money.  What is wrong with that? 2.  Fetishize money. First, note that it arises from a kind of bizarre inversion, substituting the symbol of wealth for wealth itself.  Marx will call this fetishization.  Can see that is a systematic problem built into commercial society, since commerce expands the use of money, money is abstract, and the more abstract a symbolic means of communication becomes, the more likely it is to become separated from its base.  Music as example, shift from scenes where you live the music to mass marketed.  Country music?For Smith, mercantilism is like a kind of nightmare version of his world; the dark side to commercial society. Leads to accumulation of gold reserves, without trying to increase productive base. How do you do that?3. Exports of coin bad; imports good.  How to achieve that, according to merchant class?  Balance of payments, so you’re not sending out more than you’re getting.  Thus:1. discourage imports and encourage exports of manufactured products, and2. encourage imports and discourage exports of raw material and instruments of trade.4. doomed to fail.  Why?  1) is not plausible, because coin always finds a way around restrictions, and 2) it hinders free trade, which sacrifices interests of producers to consumers, and violates the law of comparative advantage. Import restrictions stimulate protected domestic industries, and in so doing, diverts capital and talent from its most productive uses.  Ford-toyota example.  5.  combat by reducing trade barriers.  How do we arrive at the most productive uses?  Not by planning.  Let human propensity to pursue self-interest take its natural course, without allowing articial restrictions to redirect those efforts in unproductive ways.  Read p. 570: self-interest, without intending, leads us to promote general interest of society.  How?1. self-interest to keep capital as close to home as possible.  Read. P. 571.2. self-interest to generate most value.  Would you accept a proposal to make fewer widgets at higher cost?  If everybody is trying to get the most value for their work, everybody is increasing annual revenue of their home country as much as possible.  Read p. 572.  Import restriction blocks this.  Gives a home monopoly.  Indirectly directs individuals about how to use their capital/talents.  But, this policy is redundant if the product can be made as well at home as by foreigners.  And if it can’t, it’s a waste: “it is the maxim of every prudent master of a family, never to attempt to make at home what it will cost him more to make than to buy.”  P. 573.  If it costs us more to make our own cars, why do it, when we can redirect our energies to more productive ends?So mercantalism directs us to use our productive capacities in sub-optimal ways.  Free trade is typically mutually beneficial.  Read p. 623.  France-England case.  No free trade, because they both are enemies, and want to get the better end of the balance trade.  If they opened: then they would have a gigantic market, and would be encouraged to expand production in what they are distinctively best at.  Better to think about balance not of trade, but of production and consumption: need to generate enough revenue to support consumption, and put back into more expansion.  Leads to a basic political opposition that is at the heart of political conflict in commercial societies:5.  Producers vs. Consumers.  Mercantalism it is in the interest of domestic producers.  Ford was doing great with the trade monopoly.  Smith: policy should favor consumers, not producers.  P. 839: the sole end of production is consumption.  Aim of political economy is to allow consumer demands to drive production, not to force consumers to accept what producers give them.  This will in general promote the greatest good for most people.  Might hurt Ford or Sugar lobby, but the rest of us will get better cars at a lower price and can use the money we save to consume other things and develop other parts of our selves.Historical Causes of Wealth* Natural Progress of Opulence* Inhibitorso Feudalismo MercantalismGovernment and its duties* Defense* Justice* Education* ReligionSongs of the week: Livin in the City.  Free bird; Capitalism by Oingo Boingo.HISTORIAL CAUSES OF WELATH.So far we’ve been focusing on what we called before universal causes for wealth.  Smith roots his theory in basic human propensities (to exchange and better your condition) and develops an argument to the effect that wherever and whenever these propensities are allowed to develop through their logical course, wealth will increase.  There is something like a built-in, natural tendency toward commercial society in his theory.  But we also said that there are particular, historical circumstances that impact the extent to which these universal causes are in fact effectual.  And since all of us live in history and in particular places, a full theory needs to account for how these universal conditions are modified by the particular historical situations in which human beings live.  This requires something like a case study of the emergence and realization of commercial society in a real place in real time.  Smith chooses Europe for his case.The logic of his theory requires a certain kind of case study.  Remember, his theory implies that, without inhibition, human beings will naturally move toward commercial society and increasing wealth.   However, most actual socieities have not in fact done this.  And Europe in particular was very poor for about a thousand years -- since the fall of Rome around 475 AD until relatively recently.  In Smith’s day, it was just getting going, and still was blocked on many fronts, which we’ll discuss. So his analysis focuses on whatever inhibitors have historically blocked the emergence of commercial society and rising wealth.  He tries to show how those inhibitors were removed and could be further removed.  Our discussion now will focus on two major inhibitors: 1.  The feudal order that emerged in Europe out of the anarchy following the fall of Rome.  2.  The misguided policies of mercantalism.But before we get to those inhibitors, we need to first lay out how Smith thinks society is supposed to develop, how it would naturally progress toward wealth if it did not meet these obstacles.  We can then understand the actual course of events by seeing how and why they deviate from this yardstick and figuring out what it took and would take to get them back on track.  Smith calls this:THE NATURAL PROGRESS OF OPULENCE.Agriculture/Raw MaterialManufacturingForeign CommerceFarmersManufacturersMerchantsCountryCityInternationalAgriculture ----- Manufacturing ----- Foreign CommerceFarmersThe two propensities, permitted to run their course, would have produced opulent nations, starting with agriculture, then, maufacture, then foreign commerce.  That is Smith’s claim.  Why does he hold it?Has to do with country-town relations. Why should countries develop first?  1.  Subsistence comes before convenience and luxury.  P. 482. 2.  Moral Claim. farming life is the superior life.  P. 483.  have your property under your control, less contingent, less uncertainty.  Leads to more concerted, focused, and constant effort (note about present crisis, uncertainty, and how it leads people to lose confidence and take less bold and committed action).  Also, farming life is beautiful and a source of independence.  Bottom 483.  This means that, according to Smith’s picture of human nature, manufacturers would rather be farmers, and if nothing blocks them from doing so, they would rather switch from being, say, a blacksmith to becoming a planter since that will make him more independentn and free.  Similarly, manufacturing is superior to foreign trade, since foreign trade means putting your property far from home in even more uncertain circumstances, so that is the least desirable and natural kind of existence. 485.  3.  Country-Town-Foreign Trade reciprocity.  The upshot, is that a reciprocal relationship emerges: Country: provides raw material to town.  Town: provides manufactures to country.  Town rovides goods to farms for much less labor than they could do it themselves.  Town provides a market for surpluses from farms, the nearer and bigger the better. Artificers crop up to support the farmers.  Taylors, bricklayers, smiths, carpenters, etc.  Since the artificers need each others help, and aren’t restricted by having to plow a certain field, they tend to locate nearby, and form towns.   Town develops naturally according to how much the farmers can buy, and this is restricted by how much agriculture has developed.  So there is a natural connection whereby, without intervention, towns grow in proportion to the development of nearby agriculture. However, if all the farmland is already developed, or if it is really hard or impossible to acquire, and if the manufacturing base has been sufficiently developed so that investment in it would not be profitable, successful manufacturers will naturally go on to try to sell their products to new markets, usually in foreign countries.  This too is limited by the development of the other levels, and grows in tandem with the them. Read 484.  Without artificial intervention, the natural course of things is that towns increase in wealth in proportion to improvement in agriculture.  But something interrupted this natural progression in Europe, stunting its growth.  Progress went totally backwards: from foreign imports, to manufactures, to improvement of agriculture!  Totally reversed, mostly, Smith claims, because of customs and manners generated by emergence of European culture in the anarchic situation that emerged after fall of Rome.  The values and habits that emerged in the process had long-lasting effects, were deeply sedimented, so much so that it could only be reversed through an unintentional process that led to revolutionary transformations in the society, without anybody really meaning for it to do so, since those habits had become so ingrained that nobody really would have intentionally tried to change them.  How did that work?  How did the European feudal system, led by barons and kings and lords who had peasants, dig its own grave?  Provides us a brilliant example of how major social transformation can and usually does occur without planning but through working through interal tensions in a social system.  First Inhibitor: European FeudalismNine Steps:1. Fall of Rome2. Warlord Landgrab3. Bad for Agriculture (say reasons why)4. Towns rise (say why)5. foreign trade rises6. manufacturing develops7. barons weakened8. agriculture develops9. modern commercial society.1. Rome fell.  Civilization collapsed, economy fell apart, people forgot how to do stuff, roads fell into disrepair, trade stopped, constant danger and warfare.  2.  Warlord Landgrab.  A few chiefs acquired VAST amounts of land, came to be known as Barons.  It was very dangerous place, and land was not primarily a means of subsistence or something to be developed.  It was there for power and protection, from other warlords.  So the whole, vast land holdings were passed down to the firstborn son, and they were not allowed to be divided up ever.  Doing so might be fair and might make economic sense – there was just too much land for any one person to develop – but it would not make sense for political or military reasons, since it would weaken the Baron.  Made the landlord into a kind of “petty prince.”  Each little area was like a separate political unit.  Baron was judge for disputes, would lead everybody in war.  Could decide on his own if he wanted to wage war.  He could decide whether marriages could occur, and get peasant’s goods when they died.  They depended on him completely and personally.  This leads to a hierarchial society, sometimes called “patronage” or “clientist.”  Like in the Godfather.  Like Tony Soprano, giving out Christmas ducks, helping sick people, but making everybody depend on him, loyal to him personally.  Or the opening scene of the Godfather – man comes to Godfather for protection, offers a trade, a payment.  Godfather gets mad.  Says we don’t do exchanges. I’m your “friend,” you help me.  Later, I may call on you.  That is what it was like basically to be a peasant or one of the lord’s knights.  You are loyal to him, and you pledge to “help” him if he needs you, and that usually means that you’ll go fight if he asks.  Until then, if you are a knight, you hang out, eat, and train at his hosue or on his estate, and a peasant, you farm and basically kick up most of what you grow to the Baron.  Draw a network diagram, see my scanned version.  Note how the power of the system is that it can be combined and combined and combined.  Made feasible because the authority and loyalty just goes to the one directly above you, not all the way to the top.  So you might be a peasant in France and have a King in Poland, but it wouldn’t matter to you, since your whole life revolves around your lord.  If the King in Poland wants you to do something, he has to go through all the other levels, and you would be doing it not for him but for your personal connection to your immediate superior.  Supports some of the classical medieval values: loyalty, hospitality, graciousness, and courage.  Hurts Agriculture.  This situation is NOT conducive to agricultural development.  a) Baron personality structure.  One reason has to do with the personality type cultivated by these petty princes.  Key link between social structure and personality structure.  They were warriors.  Care about their reputation.  Marlo example.  If they do have leisure from their fighting, not likely to use it working, accounting, bookkeeping – they hate that stuff. Gangster example, with bling. More likely to get great houses and have fun parties.  Sopranos example: find 100, 000$, could work for dream job as masseur, but instead blow it all on gifts for friends.  b)  Peasons are unproductive.  Also, peasants weren’t going to produce much.  Basically slaves, don’t own the land.  Working solely to kick up to baron.  Anything extra they produce, goes to him, so there’s no way they are going to work any harder than they need to.  Also, they had to do a bunch of regular services for the lords, like fight, work on roads, pay extra taxes to the King.  All of which made farming seem like a pretty dirty business, that you’d want to get out of if you had any good sense.  Towns Rise.  Makes it seem like towns would be favored, and eventually they were.  But they were in a pretty bad situation after Rome fell too.  Greco-Roman towns were made up of rich landowners who lived together for protection.  They were equal citizens.  Feudal towns: the rich landowners, as we saw, lived in separate enclaves.  Towns were traders and mechanics, pretty low status people.  But they did get freedom, and were able to incorporate as collective bodies, and govern themselves.  Towns became center of modernizing bent in Europe – Venice, for example.  How did that happen? Why?  Looks like it shouldn’t happen, since cities were dregs of society, and had no property.  But eventually Kings started giving them their own property rights and rights to make their own laws and courts.  Why?  Take a look at the structural diagram.  Ask if you see any places where conflict and competition is built into the very fabric of the social structure?  It’s between the King and the nobles.  Why?  If King ever wants to get anything done, he can’t go directly to the base.  He is dependent on the nobles, who had pretty much total power in their areas.  This puts nobles and kings into constant competition, without any clear solution.  So, basically, King was always doing whatever he could to weaken the feudal barons.  What were his opportunities for doing that?  The feudal landholding system was pretty solid, couldn’t really fight it.  But could look outside the basic structure.  And so he did, and found the towns.  This  would be especially likely where the King was weak.  Then he would turn to cities for help, and trade them independence and landownership for support.  Strong Kings wouldn’t have to do this, and so cities stayed weaker in those countries.  Britian vs. France: part of explanation for why France has had a much harder transition to modern commercial society is that country lords stayed strong, and city was weaker.  In any case, weaker Kings would grant collective ownership to towspeople.   Lead to cities which stressed equality, as all citizens had equal share in owndership, and were equally responsible for defense.  They also cultivated individual achievement, standing on your own two feet, rather than reputation and rank, as in the feudal enclaves.Foreign Trade Emerges in Towns.  Which leads to developing manufacturing in towns.  More secure, townspeople could start to produce things beyond what they needed just to survive.  P. 512.  However, there was nobody to trade with nearby, since the agricultural areas were so underdeveloped. So the townspeople started trading with foreign countries.  Coastal cities, like Venice, were favored, as they could carry on foreign trade.  The towns sent their surplus raw produce, like wool, in return for manufactured goods and luxuries, like wine.  They then developed demand for those products, and learned how to do their own manufacturing modeled on those foreign products.  This is nature running backwards: foreign commerce, to manufacture.  But how did the cycle come full circle?  How did manufacture get to agriculture?Development of agriculture.1. Extended market for raw materials, encouraged development.  2. Merchants started buying land and cultivating it.  Read p. 520 for the merchant personality type as more industrious and more prone to capital investment.  Hint at “spirit” of capitalism.3. Reduced power of barons, introduced less personalistic, hierarchical government.  This is the key, really, since it led to a social revolution.  Let’s focus on it.When towns were small, barons were rich, but there wasn’t really anything that great for them to buy.  So they had great parties, which attracted a whole bunch of retainers (the knights in our diagram).  He was their perpetual host.  They stayed with him, and were loyal to him, obligated to him.  But to keep them, he had to keep on being generous to them.  These people were dependent on him totally and personally, just like the peasants, whom could barely pay their rent. But foreign commerce undermined this.  p. 525.  How?  The barons all of a sudden could buy fancy stuff.  That meant they spent less on their retainers.  Less people were personally loyal to the barons.  Yes, the barons’ money supported many people.  But in a dispersed, distributed way.  Each of the articiers had many clients, and so no single person controlled them.  Each of the barons bought from many people, and could not directly command all of them.  No direct personal relationship.  Decntralizes authority.  Use the diagram.Then, the barons needed more money, gave long leases to the farmers to generate more rent revenue.  Peasants were then able to cultivate the land, and sell the surplus, gaining greater independence from the landlords.  This led to major development of agriculture, and the great barons were basically insignificant, they could not control their territory or their local population as they could before, just one part of the total commercial system, in which everybody is interdependent on everybody else, no relations of personal dependence. Yes, thee is dependenc, but it is impersonal.  Read p. 529. On how this total revolution in social authority occurred, without anybody meaning for it to occur. Good example of how soc theory tries to provide ways of understanding these major processes, that go beyond the explicit plans of actors, to the social effects of their actions.  Also, note that this mode of explanation resonates with the type of life and world Smith is describing, advocating – the commercial world is decentralized, not based on decisions of any one individual, and though of course it has gov. policy, it strives to be less personal, more universalistic, less driven by rep and honor, more cosmopolitan, driven by citizen demands, with direct relationship between central authority and citizens, more inclusive of multiple constituencies, and so more flexible, less stuck in one viewpoint, ethnic, class, particular Second Inhibitor, the Ideological One: Mercantilism.Previous account was not really about application of a system or policy, but about unintended consequences of fall of rome, and of rise of aristocratic/warrior type.  Mercantilism, by contrast, is a system, an explicit way of organizing policy and action.  What is it?  Basically: 1.  wealth is money.  What is wrong with that? 2.  Fetishize money. First, note that it arises from a kind of bizarre inversion, substituting the symbol of wealth for wealth itself.  Marx will call this fetishization.  Can see that is a systematic problem built into commercial society, since commerce expands the use of money, money is abstract, and the more abstract a symbolic means of communication becomes, the more likely it is to become separated from its base.  Music as example, shift from scenes where you live the music to mass marketed.  Country music?For Smith, mercantilism is like a kind of nightmare version of his world; the dark side to commercial society. Leads to accumulation of gold reserves, without trying to increase productive base. How do you do that?3. Exports good, imports bad – or, you import cash, export goods.  How to achieve that, according to merchant class?  Balance of payments, so you’re not sending out more than you’re getting. 4. doomed to fail.  Why? coin always finds a way around restrictions, and 2) it hinders free trade, which sacrifices interests of consumers to producers, and violates the law of comparative advantage. Import restrictions stimulate protected domestic industries, and in so doing, diverts capital and talent from its most productive uses.  Ford-toyota example.  5.  combat by reducing trade barriers. Why? Import restriction directs our activities sub-optimally.  Gives a home monopoly.  Indirectly directs individuals about how to use their capital/talents.  But, this policy is redundant if the product can be made as well at home as by foreigners.  And if it can’t, it’s a waste: “it is the maxim of every prudent master of a family, never to attempt to make at home what it will cost him more to make than to buy.”  P. 573.  If it costs us more to make our own cars, why do it, when we can redirect our energies to more productive ends?So mercantalism directs us to use our productive capacities in sub-optimal ways.  How do we arrive at the most productive uses?  Not by planning.  Let human propensity to pursue self-interest take its natural course, without allowing articial restrictions to redirect those efforts in unproductive ways.  Read p. 570: self-interest, without intending, leads us to promote general interest of society.  How?1. self-interest to keep capital as close to home as possible.  Read. P. 571.2. self-interest to generate most value.  Would you accept a proposal to make fewer widgets at higher cost?  If everybody is trying to get the most value for their work, everybody is increasing annual revenue of their home country as much as possible.  Read p. 572.  Free trade allows this type of self-interest to flourish, and is typically mutually beneficial,.  Read p. 623.  France-England case.  No free trade, because they both are enemies, and want to get the better end of the balance trade.  So France produces its own (bad) textiles and England makes its own (bad) wine. If they opened: then they would have a gigantic market, and would be encouraged to expand production in what they are distinctively best at.  France would make wine, England textiles, and French people would get better clothes and English people would get better wine.Connected to a basic political opposition that is at the heart of political conflict in commercial societies:5.  Producers vs. Consumers.  Mercantalism it is in the interest of domestic producers.  Ford was doing great with the trade monopoly.  Smith: policy should favor consumers, not producers.  P. 839: the sole end of production is consumption.  Aim of political economy is to allow consumer demands to drive production, not to force consumers to accept what producers give them.  This will in general promote the greatest good for most people.  Might hurt Ford or Sugar lobby, but the rest of us will get better cars at a lower price and can use the money we save to consume other things and develop other parts of our selves.GOVERNMENT AND ITS DUTIESSo Smith favors free trade, and more generally, extension of liberty, and is against any policies which draw to a particular industry more capital and talent than would otherwise go to it. Would not be in favor of government bailout of auto industry.The next and final question we’ll pursue is how this relates to government.  So far we have been mostly trying to understand the conditions that lead to wealth.  But throughout, we’ve also found that these conditions are related to something else: political power – like in the cases of trade restrictions enforced by powerful barons or states.  This raises a natural question: what is the proper role of government in a commercial society? The general answer should be evident in everything that we’ve seen.  Smith favors what he calls the “system of natural liberty”: pursue your interest, as long as you don’t do anything unjust, so that you can compete with anybody you wish.  Does this mean anarchy, that is, no government at all?  No.  It leaves the gov’t with only three duties, which might turn out to be very large and very important:1. defense.  That is, the army.2. administer justice: that is, the legal system.3. public works/institutions, which are not profitable for individuals, but are for the whole society.  That is, schools and churches.Defense.  Basic structure is to historically situate responsibilities of government in reference to different social structures.  Note the sociological resonance: political forms are not independent, but change as social structure changes.  Personal qualities depend on social system.Focuses on role of government in three types of societies: hunter, herding, commercial.HuntingHerdingFarmingCommercialGovernment expendituresNone.  Whole society fights.None.   Whole society fights.Small, especially if fighting is after seedtime and before harvest.  High.  Manufacturing work leaves no leisure, whereas farmers can let seed grow.  Have to be compensated for lost time.  DOL leads to military specialists, longer wars.  Only a small number of specialists fight, maintained by rest. 1/100 of population, maximum.  Can only be rendered attractive if supported by state (in peacetime, no leisure for war training and no incenstive in commercial societies).  Can create militian or standing army.  After invention of guns makes discipline more important, standing army is superior.Who fights?EverybodyEverybodyMen, usually landownersProfessional SoldiersMilitia or Standing ArmyN/AN/AMilitiaStanding ArmyHunting: nothing really to do, since everybody is already a warrior, and no strong sovereign.Herding: not major gov expense, since all ar warriors, and everybody goes to war together.  If they lose, the society collapses, so battle to the death.Farmers, little manufacture: little expense, since most people train to be warriors on their own.  But they have fixed settlements, so need to fight not during harvest, and leave some people behind – usually women and slaves.  As long as that happens, no expense.Herders beat hunters, since herding makes bigger populations.Commercial: way more expensive.  Need to keep standing armies.  Why? 1.  Manufacturing goes year round.  Man-made, not nature-given. No time to rest, no time to take out to go to war. P. 884.  And, as strategy improves, campaigns go longer.  So need to pay people for their time.2  Also, division of labor leads to specialization.  Professional army.  But only state can support this.  For individuals, specializing in peacetime is pointless.  3.  And further: commerce softens people.  Spend all time working, not training.  So state needs to keep an army.  Can require military service, but they are not very disciplined.  Has positive social consequences, in keeping discipline.  But not as good in modern warfare.  So professinal military arises in commercial states, with big government budget.4. Modern warfare favors discipline.  Need disciplined professional army because of the smoke and noise of guns, lesser need for individual skill.  Favors trained professional army over militia.Thus: decentralized market society leads to strong central militaries made up not of ordinary citizens but of professional soldiers.  One of the internal tensions of modernity.  Administration of JusticeAdmin of Justice HuntersHerdersCommercial (maybe farming too)Gov. ExpenditureVery low.  Almost no property, so less envy, resentment, inequality, and so less crime, no need for government courts.Negative.  It is a source of revenue.  Pay to use courts.  Rampant bribery, since justice dispensed by particular person to whom payment was due Sovereign and agents rarely subject to rule of law.Low.  Taxes or Admin fees, not paid directly to judges.Source of judicial authorityAge/Personal QualitiesWealth/BirthAdministering Impartial LawInequalityLowHigh and PersonalHigh and ImpersonalPurposeSettle personal disputesProtect Rich from PoorJusticeHunters: no property, no justice systemBut property creates mine/thine, and need to protect property.  How to decide who has authority to adjudicate disputes?  Hunters: little property, so it is age and personal qualities like intelligence – things that adhere in persons. Herders: major inequality, so authority inheres in wealth and birth.  Big Man settles disputes, because everybody depends on him for everything.  More specifically: Among herders, inequality of fortune arises, some are higher than others, and so property holders get together to make courts to protect property.  Very corrupt, since little barons charge money to hear cases. Commercial societies: fund courts indirectly through taxes.  Leads to judges who make decisions based less on favors from litigants.  Aim of court becomes less to protect the rich than to apply the law impartially, protect individuals from one another.  Much inequality, but it is impersonal – I get hired by anybody willing to pay my salary, doesn’t depend so much on who it is, and I have less loyalty to that particular person.EducationAncientMedievalCommercialTopicsPhysics/Ethics/Logic/Gymnastics/MusicLogic/Ontology/Pneumatology/Debased Moral Philosophy/SuperficialPhysicsFor elite: full range.  For workers: reading, writing, arithmetic, geometry, engineering.  PaymentFees.  Works to generate excellent teachers who provide education suitable to the demands of the society.EndowmentFees for elites.  Small fee for workers, with some public support.PurposeCitizenship/Courage/Humanize MindTraining Priests.  Bad for training men of the world, improving the understanding, mending the heart.Rectify deformations caused by DOL: In general, Smith believes in something like a free market for education.  If there were no public universities, would just teach what was needed.  If nobody wanted to learn it, wouldn’t teach it.  Force teachers to be relevant and clear.His biggest example of how wrong things can go when you have universities with endowments that don’t depend on fees is the medieval university system.  It was supported mostly by the church, not the state, but the effect was the same: a system in which teachers did not have to care at all about the importance of what they were teaching to the students who were to go out and live in the world.  He clarifies this through contrasting the medieval system to the one in ancient Greece.  See chart. The medieval system basically perverted this whole education by twisting it to fit into Christian metaphysics.  Instead of learning about the natural world, students were taught about angels and the attributes of God.  The morality they learned was about the next life, and taught them nothing but hatred for this life.  This was good for becoming a priest, which was the main point of the education.  But it was terrible for training men of the world, for improving their understanding, and mending the heart.Given that, you might think that Smith would be against any kind of government funded education in commercial societies.  And he is, for the most part.  He thinks that especially the children of the well-to-do should pay their own way, and, as much as possible, professors should be paid by fees tied to student enrollment, in order to keep them on their toes.However, he still is for public education in some form in commercial society. Why?  Because of the negative aspects of the division of labor.  That is, to correct one of the discontents of modernity.  Read p. 987, on how DOL makes people dumb.  How does the DOL deform human beings?1.  Simplified job simplifies your mind.  In other social forms, say, farming, you are continually meeting challenges, responding to a changing environment, and adapting, getting stronger on the way.  You don’t get numbed, and are capable of exercising independent judgment.  Yes, you have fewer people with the broadest of understandings of the world, but more people know how to do a whole bunch of things: “every man does, or is capable of doing, almost every thing which any other man does, or is capable of doing” (988).  Modern society: tons of variety as a whole, but each individual is very monotonous.  Yes, some people get to sit back and try to make sense of how it all fits together.  But that is rare, and it is unlikely that they will be in a position to use that understanding to help others.2.  Decline in public spiritedness.  Lazy mind cannot reach beyond itself.  Get absorbed in your private affairs, and cannot make judgments about public good or needs of others.3.  Makes you cowardly.  DOL makes you used to regularity, predictability.  Courage means responding steadfastly to the unpredictable – so you avoid any dangerous situation, any adventure.  4.  Weakens body.  Only know how to exert your body for your own little job.  Hammering pins all day.  Makes you weak.How to remedy these?  State needs to intervene, at least for the working class.  Richer parents can make sure that their children get exposed to varied pursuits and develop their minds.  Poorer parents have a harder time doing that.  State schools could educate them into the three R’s, ennoble that pursuit by giving prizes for success, and enforce it by requiring some kind of examination before being licensed to pursue a trade.  But Smith does not want the salary of the teacher wholly paid by the public, would still charge a small fee.   Why does Smith favor this kind of state intervention to remedy the ill effects of the modern economic system?  Argument seems to be about the potential effects of education on the character of individuals.  Why is character important?1.  Freedom requires courage.  It is the duty of government to prevent the growth of cowardice.  P. 993.  A lazy, cowardly society is easily defeated or easily taken over by a tyrant or dictator.  Need education to continue to exercise broad range of human capacities.  This is the “humanist” streak in Smith.  Smith cares less about cultivating democratic virtues of public participation in townhall meetings, etc., then in aligning private with public interests.  So he cares about education from a “humanist” perspective, like greeks cared about military training, for cultivating a whole person.  We still need that, and if we can’t get it military training, instead in broad liberal education that enhances human powers, both mind and body. 2.  Freedom requires intelligence.  Read p. 994.  Education prevents fanaticism and superstition, which are threats to national stability and order.  Educated people have more self-respect, less dependent on ideas of others.  They are able to exercise critical judgment, see through lies and half-truths of interested factions, like lobbyists and party hacks.  Since free countries depend on consent of citizens, it is important that they are able to make measured judgments, and not get caught up in frenzies.  General note: Smith is interestingly trying to transfer the old militaristic/martial virtues of courage, which were at home in feudal culture, to the commercial society, but in a new way: have to preserve human integrity, even if no direct government benefit.  Even the old guard warrior types agree to this.  But to do that now means not so much doing military exercise, but going to college and getting an education.  Before we said that Smith was attacking aristocratic virtues.  And he is.  But he’s also trying to do something more subtle: transform them from within.  We can preserve the core of your value by generalizing it from “martial” to “standing behind what you say,” and then saying that doing THAT requires a broad intellect.  And so the aristocrats could get on board with the new society. RELIGIONRemember, Smith is writing about the duties of government, especially in a commercial society.  His question is: what public institutions do governments have a duty to support?  Which means something like: which institutions can only realize their full and proper social function if they are supported by the government vs. being left free to develop on their own, with only minimal government intervention to prevent people from harming one another.  The question now then becomes: what duties to governments have with respect to religion?  Should governments create established religions?  How should they tame or channel the zeal, conviction, and energy that religions generate in people so that energy doesn’t create civil unreast?His first main question has to do with the question of established religion.  He is responding to an argument by a famous philosopher, David Hume.  Hume argued that governments should establish religions.  This is because freedom of religion encourages religious teachers to actively proselytze, to seek out new customers and to compete with other religions, and this will get everybody worked up into a religious frenzy.  Better to establish a religion, since this will make the leaders lazy and followers less fanatically committed to their sects.  And this in turn will lead to political and social stability.EstablishedNon-EstablishedOriginsNeeds of political FactionImpartialityProselytizing EnergyLowHighInterest of religionsMaintain absolute authority with the peopleMaintain austerity and morality, attract new disciplesSocial DangerHigh; multiple social authoritiesLow; competition breeds mutual toleranceGovernment involvementDependent on favor of priests; need to manage their incentivesMaintain justice among sects; promote education; cultural diversionsSmith disagrees.  His argument is based on an analysis of the typical origins of established religions.  They are typically rooted in the “needs of political faction.”  That is, there is some violent conflict in the society in which both religious and political disputes are caught up.  English wars of religion.  Political parties end up lining up with differing religious groups.  And whichever party wins the fight ends up owing the religion that supported it.  And they usually ask for religious competitors to be punished and crushed.  This does in the long run weaken the religion, since it becomes lazy.  But it leads to major social dangers, since it creates an institutionalized rival for authority with the government, and makes political leaders care a lot about controlling and regulating the actual content of church doctrine.  But the interest of the church and of the state sometimes line up, but often are opposed.  Throughout, the church tries to remain the single, absolute authority over the people, their one and true teacher and salvation.  The sovereign, the government, becomes dependent on them – if he crosses the church, or tries to weaken its authority by punishment or regulation, the people tend to side with the church, and the ruler is declared sinful.  What can the government do in this situation?  Smith says that direct opposition will not work.  The best thing to do is to manage their incentives so that they lose support with the people.  Basically, Smith suggests that the same process which led to the weakening of the barons can lead to the weakening of established churches: established churches’ authority relies on their appeal to the people and to the loyalty of what amounts often to their own independent armies and courts.  The warriors have their allegiance to the church because they live on church grounds and enjoy church hospitality; the people have their allegiance both for the same reason and because they see in priests examples of holiness and morality.  However, once commerce improves, established churches tend to spend more of their wealth, just like the barons did, on buying new goods, less on supporting their dependents.  This makes them lose that support from warriors, and also makes them look less virtuous to the people, since they are surrounded with riches.  This in turn weakens the independent authority of the church, and makes them more dependent on the state.  It also, eventually, opens them up to challenge from new religious movements, like the protestant reformation, that promise to bring discipline and simplicity and morality back to a faith that seems to have fallen into debauchery.  And this can then eventually lead to the total destruction of established churches.That is how established churches develop and what Smith thinks governments should do with them.  He clearly favors less government involvement in religion.  How does he think that would work?  Smith doesn’t really say explicitly what process leads to the origin of religious freedom.  Just says that if politics never bring in religion to help, they probably would have dealt equally and impartially with all religions, and let them go on their way so long as they don’t harm each other.  What would happen if that were allowed to unfold?Main thing is that the number of different religious movements would rapidly grow.  You would see religious entrepreneurs.  No religion would be absolutely secure in its position.  Would this lead to the kinds of threats of fanaticism that Smith imagined?  Most likely not, however, what threats might arise Smith believes can be mitigated by sound public policy.First, why not, probably:  read 1001.  Each movement would be on its own, unable to defeat all the others since they wouldn’t be backed by government force.  So they would have to develop the basic arguments that they could, and likely respect, as much as possible, the existence and doctrines of others.  And even if this doesn’t happen, if fanatics get generated, lots of the bad effects would be self-regulated away, since no movement would be stronger than the others, and any new movement would likely spawn many sub-camps, which would not be big enough to dominate the rest.Second:  but there are still some dangers.  The primary one is rooted in urbanization, and necessitates what Smith seems to think should be the main government policies with respect to religion.  What is the problem?  Commercial society tends to lead to massive immigration from the country to the city. In the country, common people are known to one another; they have a character, a reputation, and “everybody knows your name.”  This gives life context and significance – what you do matters.  In coming to the city, this context is often shatters.  Read 1004.  Nobody knows who you are, and the world seems adrift, aimless, without purpose.  Often, religious cults swoop in to fill the void.  They are typically highly regimented, disciplined, and segmented from the rest of the population – in a word, anti-social.  They give meaning, focus, purpose, a place in the world, to people cut loose by commercial society.  How to respond to this?  Smith proposes two possibilities:1.  Education.  If the state requires more people to learn about science, philosophy, nature, and if this is required to enter into any profession, then this will likely reduce the temptation to superstition and fanaticism.  1005.2.  Cultural policy.  Part of what inspires the feeling of purposeless and alienation is the lack of interesting and exciting amusements in cities.  Cities, at Smith’s time, were barren, lifeless, dirty places, where only the rich people had access to amenities.  Hemmingway on Toronto.  But if you make them exciting places, that gloomy melancholy which leads to fanaticism might not emerge.  Read bottom 1005.  Stress that Smith is not anti-religion – these are actually policies that seek to keep religion vital and relevant and less-superstitious through allowing them liberty.  