LECTURE NINE1. DEMOCRACY AND MODERNITY2. BIOGRAPHY AND CONTEXT3. DEMO AS WAY OF LIFEa. ORIGINS OF DEMOCRACYb. ATTRACTIONS OF ARISTOCRACY4. AMERICAN DEMOCRACYa. THE FIRST NEW NATIONb. DEMOCRATIC SOCIETY5. DEMOCRATIC POLITICSCOMMERCE, SCIENCE, CAPITALISM, DEMOCRACY.We’re now spent a fair bit of time reading some powerful theories of the New World – not so much New in the sense of those physical parts of the world “discovered” by Columbus, but rather New in the sense of a new epoch, a new form of life that was taking shape initially in Europe, but pretty quickly globally.  The general name for this is Modernity, but defining and understanding that in more detail is incredibly difficult.  Our readings so far have started to give us some tools to do this, highlighting some of the central features of the New World and providing theoretical tools for understanding it.  One reason why these authors’ visions are so enduring is that they tend to work from a very narrow set of presuppostions, and build out a standpoint that adheres, with ruthless (perhaps too ruthless) consistency to that standpoint, often providing a narrower picture of reality in the process, but a picture nonetheless that is coherent and penetrating because its rooted in a core set of concepts.  What we’re doing in this class, in one way, is laying out those core presuppositions and seeing what follows if you take one or the other, putting them into conversation, seeing how they might be joined.We’ve seen two major perspectives on the nature of modern society that we’ve already seen?  In Smith, we saw what modernity looks like, what it means to be modern, if THAT is primarily defined as the Rise of Commercial Society.  That is, for Smith, the key change is the emergence of markets, what we called market order, the rise of exchange relationships, the division of labour, money, and so on.  His general procedure in WN is to first understand the “pure” structure of the market order, and then to ask how the emergence of that order affects other aspects of society: what kind of politics do commercial societies have, what kind of legal systems, what kind of families, what kind of militaries, etc.  Marx took up a different aspect of economic life than Smith did.  Smith saw commerce, markets, and exchange as the central features of modernity.  Marx agreed these were important, but more important, he thought, were the distinctively modern forms of production and property – namely, capitalism and private property.  These, he though, lay back of the commercial order and give a deeper view into the nature of modernity.  Accordigly, his approach is to begin with a “pure” account of capitalism as a certain mode of production and a certain mode of property, defined centrally in his analysis as the production of commodities in order to generate profit, exploitation of labour, and alienation.  Then, he moves out from this analysis to draw conclusions about the rest of society – what are capitalist politics like, what happens to the family under capitalism, religion, work, etc.  Moreover, both of them make their arguments with some sort of historical narrative: Smith highlights the modernity of commercial society through a historical account of its origins  agricultural, feudal societies; Comte highlights the modernity of posivist society through an account of its emergence from theological and metaphysical societies; Marx highlights the newness of capitalist production by comparing it to primitive communism, Greek and Roman property, and feudal property.Now we’ve been shifting to what is a rather differet starting point, and ask how our understanding of the New World changes if we do that.  Wollestonecraft pointed in this direction already. Her basic starting point was not economics, either in the form of commerce or production. It was equality, and the main question is about the nature of a society defined by non-domination – in which no person automatically has authority over anybody else. She focused on how this would change the nature of the family and relations between men and women, but the consequences are clearly much more far reaching. They point towards democracy, not only as a way of selecting a leader, but an entire way of life and framework for understanding society itself. Our guide for understanding this will be Alexis de Tocqueville.  TOCQUEVILLE BIOGRAPHY AND CONTEXTTocqueville was born in 1805, died in 1859.  In contrast to the other authors we studied, Tocqueville was an aristocrat.  He was a count.  Smith’s father was a customs official; Comte’s father was a petty public official; Marx’s father was a lawyer.  They all come, in one way or another, from the sorts of individuals who would become more important in the modern world – bureaucrats, officials, professionals – the middle class.  Tocqueville’s family was different: he came from one of the oldest noble families in France.  His grandfather was a knight.  His father was a count.  He was imprisoned during the French Revoltion with his mother’s grandfather; the grandfather was guillotined, along with many other family members.  So Tocqueville had a very different perspecive on the revolutionary breakthrough into modernity happening around Europe.  To him, as to his fellow aristocrats, it was the sad END  of an old world rather than the (rocky, dangerous, but exciting) beginning of a new one.  To him, as to his fellow aristocrats, and against our other authors in many ways, there were deeply positive qualities to the aristocratic order – it was not just a stumbling block inhibiting commerce, science, and the excesses of capitalist production.  It allowed for certain higher, better kinds of possiblities to flourish, like glory, individual distinction, respect, order.  But, in contrast to his fellow aristocrats, Tocqueville believed that the end of what he called The Old Regime was inevitable.  Nothing could stop the onset of the new world, as we’ll see.  So the task is then to understand that world, recognize its promises and its perils, and to channel it towards its better parts while protecting it from its worse.  What those are we’ll see.  To do this, though, Tocqueville decided to go where he thought the new world was on display in its purest form: America (just as Marx and Smith went to London to see commercial, capitalist society in its purest form).  Remember, at the time the U.S.A. was not the international goliath it is now.  It was an upstart.  But Tocqueville thought he saw the future there, and that Europe and the rest of the world could see their own futures there, they could treat it as a social laboratory where democratic society could flourish uninhibited by the feudal and aristocratic heritage fo the past, which was still around in Europe and pretty much anywhere else it was attempted:  yes, there had been a revolution in France, but after it was over, the dukes and barons and everybody are still there, and the weight of hundreds of years of aristocratic society remains.  In America, there was not middle ages, there was no nobility, so you could see what the new society looked like in its purest and most distinctive terms.  So Tocqueville traveled around America for a year, going all over the place, meeting important people, going up to Canada.  Then he came back to France, and wrote it up.  It was a hit; he was famous.  He become politically active, serving in the parliament as a liberal candidate, neither for the old aristocracy or the socialist radicals.  He then wrote, five years later, the second volume, which was not a successful.  His work was not so widely read as a sociologic al classic, just like Marx, until probably the mid 20th century, when he seemed to offer an alternative to Marxian analyses, which relied heavily on class to explain the world.  Tocqueivlle turned attention to issues of democracy and tyranny, which seemed to provide a good way to understand the major threats of the 20th century.  DEMOCRACY AS A WAY OF LIFE	ORIGINS OF DEMOCRACY.Like our other authors, Tocqueville turned away from studying pure politics to understanding the broader social order.  For him, the great revolution was not in production, but in increasing “equality of conditions” – people are more alike, there are fewer orders, less deference to elites.  T explains what this means through a historical narrative, like our other authors.  But the emphasis is decidedly different, as it focuses on the rise of equality than of markets, science, or industry:Aristocratic Order: Read bottom of 3, top of 4.  Hereditary; force; land.  a few elite families, possess land and govern everybody else.  Command passes from generation to generation.  Get people to do things by force, not persuasion or incentive.  Power is rooted in land, not intellect or productivity or moral integrity.  How did this change?  Rise of new sources of social influence not rooted in land and family.New sources of social influence leading to democracy.1. Clergy.  Priests get land and influence.  a. Anybody can become a priest.b. Priests can exercise powerc. So people of common, low origin start to take their place next to Kings2. Civil Law.a. As society gets larger and complex, need lawyers to deal with disputes. Birth doesn’t guarantee that you’re a good lawyer.  Need professional expertise.  Then, regular people who are smart end up advising kings, right next to the Knights.3. Commercea. Kings and nobles waste money on wars, aren’t psychological disposed to merchant life.b. Regular people become merchants, gain wealth, and with it, influence.  c. Note that commerce is important for T, but it’s a sub-category, rather than the Main Thing.4. Enlightementa. Literature, arts, science.  Museums, learned societies, salons.  Men of letters, successful writers from common families, become influential.  All of these weakened the capacity of land and birth to generate social power.  Kings could turn to these new social powers – priests, lawyers, merchants, intellectuals – as allies against their aristocraic rivals.  Everything pushed in this direction.  Why?Historical causes: (pp 5-6)1. Crusadesa. Decimated nobles. Bottom p. 5.2. Townshipsa. Fostered freedom and democracy3. Firearms, all equal on the battlefield4. Printing press: everybody can read5. Mail: all can communicate and learn about the world6. Protestantism: all in direct communion with God.7. America: everybody can make it.	Democracy is inevitagle, a historical tide is carrying it forward.  As if God’s will.  You can’t stop it.  Read p. 6 quotes.ATTRACTIONS OF ARISTOCRACYBut nobody knows how to control it.  It’s like a wave crashing against the Old World.  Need new ideas to match the new world.  But in France, things are a mess, with reactionaries fighting to turn it back and radicals letting loose its worse parts.  That is T’s guiding question: what is democracy, what good and bad consequences flow from it, how to affirm th good and control the bad?  Read p. 676, last sentence.What are the dangers?  How does democracy unsettle social order?  Need to understand positive qualities in aristocratic order:1. Nobles could keep central power in check. 2.  Kings’ divinity led them not to abuse power.3. Noblesse Oblige4. Peasants looked up to nobles, as to protectors.  A natural order, so you don’t feel bad about your lower condition.  Accepted the power as legitimate.  Then what happened?  Democracy comes in, and nobody knows where they stand anymore.  Nobles get defensive, try to keep down the commoners.  Peasants feel deprived, try to take down the nobles.  Religion becomes reactionary, allies with Old Order rather than with democracy.  Proponents of modernity and democracy end up becoming atheists.  However, if democracy, or any social system, is to be successful, it needs, T thinks, to be rooted in feelings and communal practices, of which religion is the most powerful.  So now you have religious people against freedom, and the friends of freedom against religion.  Everything is mixed up!What can you do?  T’s vision: read p. 9.  A democratic republic. No really great individuals, like in aristocracies, but everybody is equal.  No glory, but more reciprocity.  Read 674.  234-235.Where can you learn about that?  America as “image of democracy itself” p. 13.  A laboratory for understanding the nature of democracy society, and then understanding the consequences in politics, family structure, commerce, ideas, culture, etc. that follow from living in democratic social conditions.THE FIRST NEW NATIONWhy skip ch. 1?  Would lead us to believe the book is only about American experience.  But it is a about more, about America as case study for understanding democractic society. That is the agenda: effects of equality across all domains of human life: politics, society, culture, emotions.  Initial chapters speak to both general causes of democratic society, and then special situation in America.  Rest of Part I draws the political consequences of this kind of society.  Part II moves to a more direct discussio of “the people,” it instincts, drives, effects, future as a political force.  Volume II shifts from the political to the civil sphere, what we might now call the social sphere.  Daily life, ideas, culture, family, etc.  Part IV asks about the connection between democraic ideas and feelings and government.  Shifts level again: first was the social state to the poltical state, then social state to civil, now ideas to political.  So how to understand the distinct features of the version of democratic society that we find in the United States?  Start with its originary experiences, since these set the tone for what follows.Read p. 27-28.  7-Up example.  General social-theoretical approach: formative experiences shape your identities, define your values, and then the concrete ends you pursue express these values.  This can explain many policies and practices that might seem otherwise obscure.  Metric system example.  In older individuals and societies, this can be obscure, since it happened a long time ago.  But in younger nations, you can still see the formative experiences.  This holds in America, but everywhere – Canadian formative experience defines much of the kind of life in Canada.  Also within countries: the original immigrant groups, their religious cultures, political cultures, have far-reaching, long-lasting effects.What were the key elements of the formative American experience such that a “pure” democratic society emerged there for the first time?1. Immigrant culture.a. Few choose to leave home if they are already the elites.  Rest are pretty equal.2. Small landholdings.a. Wide open spaces.  Couldn’t cultivate giant areas.  Split up into small plots, owned by small property owners, farmed by them by their own hands.  Note this is Smith’s dreamworld.  Perfect seedbed for equality.3. Generally highly educated, but not noble.4. Had families.  Not lone adventurers.  There to make a world.a. New world example.5. Idealism.  Not forced out, but came voluntarily in pursuit of an ideal.  The country was founded on a commitment to a set of values, not on hereditary background.  If you subscribed to the idea, you could be a part of it, whoever you are.  Contrast to France, Gemany, Brittain – TRIBAL names.6. Calvinism and Puritanism.  Absolute political equality.  Geneva near France.  a. Leads to the strict moralism of American democracy.  P. 38.  Highest incarceration rates, death penalty.  Seems contradictory.  But it can be a part of democratic equality: EXPECT everybody to be pure, moral, righteous.  Then you punish more harshly crime.  Aristocratic way: you expect lower orders to be raucous, unruly.  So crime is what they do, why punish it, you’re not going to reform them.  If you expect all to be good and equally, you have to punish, to make everybody better.  But these high moral expectations license the expectation that everybody should be able to participate in politics freely as a full-fledged free citizen.  And in that sphere, in politics, you find great openness and experimentation.  Since they assumed that everybody who could be a citizen was equally fit to do so, they were not stuck in political traditions are fixed ways of doing things and would try things out.7. Public Educationa. A religious duty.  Until last 10 years or so, % of population that went to Univesity in U.S. WAY higher than any other country.  Recently, Germany, England, France catching up, but still lower, was way more class based.  15 of top 20 Universities worldwide or American, if you add in Canadian, than 17 out of 20 are North American.8. Fused religion and freedom.a. Compare to Marx and others who saw religion as antithetical to modernity.  T thinks that freedom nourishes religion and religion nourishes freedom. Freedom supports religion: getting politics out of religion is better for religion.  Purifies religious experience, creates a space where you know if you’re a believer its because you’re a believer, not for power or influence.  In this view, separarting church from state is good for religion, for religious reasons.  Takign away political role of religion is a divine task, for T. Other side: freedom sees in religion one of its elemental sources in conscience.  What is conscience?: an expression of our right to believe only what we can accept by our own lights, the authenticity of our selves.  Can’t force somebody into faith.  Freedom is ESSENTIAL to authentic faith.9. Estate laws.  Saw in Smith how important this is.  Land use is central to social life.   Read p. 47. Two effects of equal distribution of inheritance to children:a. Material effect.  Property broken up among several people.  On its own, works slowly, since a couple combines famlily resources, and typically there are two children, so not a major turnover.b. Spiritual Effect.  Primogeniture maintains family spirit, roots it in the land.  I see myself in the land, there, objectified (remember Marx on labour).  Equal distribution of land breaks this.  You might stay wealthy, invest the property, sell it, make lots of money.  But you will not BE the land, like Alexi DE Tocqueville.  He is OF the that land.  But if you split the land up among sibilings, they usually sell the land and split the profits.  They might end up making a ton of money, more than they would have if they kept the land.  But they end up defining themselves through other things, like their profession or their education or how much they earn in their investments, rather than their land.  This means heredity of land and the centrality of the family, generations, is dead, and with it, aristocracy. Read p. 49.  Compare U.S. to France.  In U.S., land is treated as a commodity.  France, land still stays in families for geneations. Not that there isn’t rich and poor.  But it is not inscribed in nature.  Open possibility.  Barack Obama.  Read p. 50.All of these form the American cultural genome, so to speak.  They fuse into what T calls “the social state.”  It si something like the core essence of a nation, and everything else about it is an effect of modification or expression or elaboration of that state.Read p. 45.  The Social State.The Revolution made it explicit, let it shine out, free from its historical baggage.  But T doesn’t want to say it is all about the act of revolution.  The revolution EXPRESSED something deeper, which is manifest in laws and customs – in the social state.  In fact, the key movement toward equality, and the “last step,” is rooted in laws of inheritance, in land use policy:DEMOCRATIC SOCIETY AND DEMOCRATIC POLITICSPolitics in Democratic SocietyDangersMain one is:  Tyranny of the Majority.  P.  241.  Bottom p. 91. Leads to many related dangers.1. Conformism.  P. 244.2. Mediocrity.  P. 234-2353. Short-sighted leaders (222, 224) vs. aristocratic leaders who don’t get distracted by fads and polls.4. Politics of Resentment (189)So, there are distinctive political dangers implicit in a democratic society.  And, as T has argued, many of the old aristocratic remedies or checks against these dangers won’t work – you can’t appeal to a duke or lord as a defense against the fickleness of public opinion, since people don’t respect that type of haughty status; and even if you elected a noble lord to public office, he would be just as subject to the polls as anybody else.  So you need to find if there are potentials within democratic society that might provide some kind of internal corrective to its own dangerous tendencies. However, since these internal correctives, whatever they are, are firmly rooted in democracy itself, they too will be open to its characteristic excesses.  The task, then, for T is to try to heighten and highlight these positive potentials while fully acknowledging and not glossing over their downsides.  So, what are the “internal correctives” to the political dangers of democracy that we can identify in the very heart of democractic society itself?  1. Administrative Decentralization.  Administrative vs. Governmental.  P. 82-83.  Governmental centralization is concerned with matters that affect the whole nation equally, like foreign policy and defense.  For this, centralization is very important.   However, there are other matters that do not affect all areas of the country equally, like, for example, education policy or urban zoning policy.  Now, there is a tendency in democracies to centralize these.  Since democracy tends toward equality it also tends toward standardization – treaty everybody the same everywhere.  Let’s have one single national education policy, and let’s have it led by the central government, elected by the majority of the people.  Makes sense, and sounds more efficient.  However, T worries that this will in fact make more apathetic about public concerns, since there will be a tendency to leave things to Ottowa or Washington.  What does it matter to me what some bureacrat decides?  Administrative decentralizatio poses a genuinely democratic alternative.  It basically means that in matters of local concern for the most part you leave things up to the locals.  Yo don’t have a central education standard education policy, but each community, with lots of community meetings and public input, decides its own curriculum itself.  This is democratic since all people can feel like they are a part of the process.  Now, this has some serious negatives: harder to get things done, looks like chaos, little standardization and uniformity.  Example of health care town hall meetings.  Or weird text book policy in CA and NY.  Positives: increase energy in particiapation in public life. P. 87.  Bottom p. 88.  Engenders liberty and confidence in power to act.  Top. P. 89, p. 90.  Check against power of central authority.  Bottom p. 91.  Note again that T is clear that he is primarily concerned with the POLITICAL benefits of admin decentralization.  It might in fact be slightly worse for everybody’s education or health to allow so much local control.  But it is a necessity, he thinks, for maintaining the strong sense of public participation that is the condition for a health free people.2. Newspapers.  Freedom of the press is also rooted in democracy: everybody is free to express an opinion.  Didn’t have many newspapers in aristocracy, because the important people would just talk to each other, and nobody would care what an op-ed would say.  But there is a danger in newspapers:  Lots of reckless critique of government and leaders written by people with their own agendas, often without any knowledge or training, designed to stir up public opninon, often agitates resistance, makes it hard to act: 174.  Also, centralization of opinion in to a few outlets is dangerous, since it stifles public debate.  176.  But Need for them: 173-174.  Often it is very easy for a majority government to violate the law and the opposition is not able to complain.  Need newspapers to keep the central authorities honest and in check.  But how to then check the tendency of newspapers to become too big and in bed with the majority themselves: Solution, lots of small newspapers: 177.  Example of Washington Post vs. blogs.  3. Voluntary Associations: Definition: 180.  Rooted in democracy: we all our free to join whatever association we want, with whoever we share an agenda or set of concerns (rather than to just let the elites take care of things, democratic people tend to just get ordinary people together around some cause.  Community activism, neighborhood groups, green peace, etc.) P. 181: gathers diverse people around a cause, provides a meeting place, and can sometimes be called on to influence government in parties.  Dangers: 182.  Might come to provide independent sources of legitimacy, separate from the government and basic authorities, and so source of instability and faction.  Example of communist groups – free to form anti-democratic associations in a democracy!.  Need for them as check againt abuses of power: 183.  As training for democratic freedom: 232-233.4. Mediocre Leadership.  Also rooted in democracy: we tend to elect regular Joes, and our best people don’t want to go through the torture of an election.  Problem: 189.  Solutions: it actually turns out that mediocre leadership is in the long term interest of a country.  Since mediocre leaders are more or less like most people, their decisions, in the long haul, tend to help out the majority of the people, even if any single decision is bad.  By contrast, aristocratic leaders, even if they are genuinely trying to promote the common good, are often so immersed in their class and so different from the regular people, that their decisions do not help most people. (222, 224).  Interest of leaders tends over time to align with most people.5. Patriotism: What does democratic society do to patriotism?  It weakens at least one kind of patriotism that T calls “instinctive.”  Read p. 225.  But democractic people find it harder to have this kind of instinctive love of country.  This is because, as we’ll explain in more detail later, in democracies people tend to want NOT to want to accept anything instinctively.  They want to see for themselves, have it proven to them.  And this weakens that kind of immediate, automatic, love of country.  Problem (loses immediacy, becomes reflective): 225.  This is dangerous, since patriotism is one of the two ways in which a people can be mobilized to do great things, to undertake sacritices for the greate good (the other is religion).  And if you lose that capacity, you’re on the road to losing your freedom.  The solution is to find another, authentically form of patriotism.  T calls this reflective patriotism. Read p. 225.  This is a patriotism rooted in seeing the results and goodness of our country proven.  It is created not automatically but through active participation. Solution (participation) 226-227.  Why annoying.6. Rule of Law: internal feature of democracy, since laws are taken to be expression of the will of the whole people (top 230, end of 231 section), and democratic people don’t want to have rulers treated any different from anybody else, so they cannot be above the law.  Rule by law, not men.    problem is that you can make bad laws, and if you’re bound by the rule of law, you have to obey them, even when it might be better not to, and if you had a wise noble ruler who was not bound by the laws he would be able to adjust as necessary. 231.  Solution: respect law because you can change it (230).  This is one way in which the minority and the opposition can still feel like they are not being overrun – they respect the laws of the majority because they hold out hope of beign the majority some day.  This is how the fluidity and ficklness of democratic public opnion actually helps to maintain order, because every current minority could tomorrow become the majority.  If they didn’t have that hope, they might revolt or become revolutionary.LECTURE 10	DEMOCRATIC POLITICSDEMOCRATIC CULTUREINDIVIDUALISM AND SOCIAL CONTROLDemocratic Society—Democratic CultureSo far, we’ve been trying to understand the political consequences of democratic society.  The method we’ve been following, Tocqueville’s method, is to first try to understand the basic characteristics of the democratic “social state.”  Then we ask how that “social state” impacts political life, the political practices it generates (like newspapers, weak leaders, etc.); the threats those forms raise, and the ways those threats can be minimized so as to preserve the positive qualities of democratic life.This is why this is a genuinely social theory.  Think of a social system as composed ofa number of variables, like political life, emotional life, social life, cultural life.  T is asking: what happens to the rest of the variables if you change one central variable, namely, the social stat, from aristocratic to democratic?  How and why does shifiting THAT variable shift politics?  Now we’re going to shift to another variable, and think about the CULTURAL consequences of democracy.  We’ll do so in a number of arenas.A. Cultural Consequences of Democracy1. Philosophy2. Religion3. Morality4. Science5. Crafts6. Fine Arts7. Language8. HistoriographyPHILOSOPHYWhat happens to philosophy in a democratic society?  Well, democratic people don’t spend a lot of time reading philosophy, Tocqueivlle says.   This is still true  empirically.  Use Conant’s example about Frenchman and Descartes.But even if Americans don’t read a lot of philosophy, Tocqueville argues,  they do operate under a certain philosophy.  Fititingly, it is a philosophy which in fact would encourage somebody not to read much philosophy!  Namely, Descartes, the guy the French read all the time, but therefore don’t really understand!Read p. 403 for the American philosophy: rely only on your own individual reasoning faculties.  For T, key thing is that democratic SOCIAL STATE tends toward this kind of individualistic thinking.  Cultural commitment to a kind of philosophy is a functon of sociological conditions.    What are the coditions.  Read 403: volatility of America society, lose track of what ancestors thought, weakens power of traditions.  Group-level chacteristics weaken – can’t anymore say what “people like me” are supposed to think, because these people are always changing.  One individual great mind cannot influence many people, fewer people bow at the feet of a genius.  All of this turns people back inward, into the inner sanctum of their indiivudal minds.  What follows from this philosophical inwardness and reliance on personal confirmation by each person with what he can see with his own eyes?  Informality/matter-of-factness in thought and expression.  Why wear fancy suits and go through strange old rituals?  Example about American academics wearing jeans.RELIGION.To see what happens to religion in democratic society, T explains the social functions of religion at three levels:1.  GENERAL, that is, its necessity for all societies.2.  Among FREE peoples.  3.  Among DEMOCRACIES.T starts from the notion that we need some dogmas, some beliefs we just accept without questioning them.  P. 407 (not in reading, should add for next year).  The argument is similar to an idea we encountered in Comte: if we there were no grounding beliefs that we all just share, there would be chaos – we could never undetake any common, social action.  So we need some common, shared source of ideas that we need to take ready-made, as it were.  For example, for us, it might be the sanctity of the individual person.  Example of how this is different: rise of rape laws rather than defiling religious icons as the worst crime.So, we need SOME dogma.  But T thinks, in particular, we need some religious Dogma.  He thinks we can’t avoid wondering about God, the nature of our souls, our duties to other soulful beings.  So we need to understand God, and we need some solid ideas about that, or lots of what we do is going to be pretty unsettled.But here’s the problem: religion is what we most need to know about, but it’s the hardest to know anything about!  Even if it were easy, which it isn’t, most people don’t have the leisure time to acquire it.  So we need religion for daily life, but daily life blocks us from understanding religion.  This means that religious ideas, at least at the most general level, should be protected from skepticism and individual reasoning.  This is because religions, pretty much all of them, provide clear, comprehensible, feelable, answers to the great questions of human existence.  And we need those answers to get on with life.This is true in GENERAL.  But it is HEIGHTENED for  FREE people (note the difference to Marx) who have the option to have no religion since they are free.  Why?  For T, if you have no religion, you have no answers to or ways to think about those deepest questions.  You eventually stop talking about those deep issues.  You become unable to face up to them, in a cowardly way.  This weakens people, prepares them for servitude: now, somebody can come along and provide the answers, and keep everybody else in line.  People willingly give up their freedom to have a Leader tell them what to think, so they don’t have to endure the terrible burdens of freedom to think about the basic issues of existence.  Read 418. Examples of cloning or maybe abortion.So far, we’ve move from GENERAL to FREE.  Now to DEMOCRACIES:Functions of Religion in democracies:1.  Check narcissism. There are democratic dangers, as we’ve seen.  In the present context, the main danger is a kind of selfishness, a narcissism, becoming occupied with yourself and only yourself.  Sheilaism example.  Religions can remedy this tendency and link your private concerns with broader social and cosmic questions. imposes duties to serve humanity, people beyond yourself.2.  Check materialism.  In democracies, you might tend to become hedonisitic, concerned with self-gratification and your personal, material well-being.  I want to get mine, you want to get yours – since nobody is really secure in their position, and even the poorest people can imagine improving, we think a lot more about material well-being.  These are problems everywhere, but democraic life inflames them.  Religion can help: raises you above your sensual needs to higher needs.  But from here T notes that the democratic social state puts certain restrictions on what kinds of religion will be acceptable, will “root themselves in men’s hearts.”  1.  Cannot subdue the desire for wealth.  note 422: T says that it is useless for religions to try to completely subdue the desire for wealth; they will get nowhere in democratic societies if they do that.  Try to show that gaining wealth honestly is holy, but don’t deny the value of worldly success as such.  2.  Cannot go beyond their own sphere.  Bottom 419.  They need to stay out of politics and science in particular.  Since there is such a spirit of skepticism, if religions start getting tangled up in issues beyond their own domain (where we need them and always will, T thinks), democraic people will start to question them.  So the “functional differentiation” of religionis built into democratic society – not its replacement or demise, for T.3.  Need to minimize external forms and rituals.  P. 421.  There is, again, a kidn of “just the facts ma’am” matter of factness built into democratic culture; don’t want to go beyond what you can see and confirm yourself.  This means that external rituals (like the mass, for example) are going to be less persuasive, and more important will be religious practices that appeal personally to individual experience and testimony.  These are aspects of religious “function” and constraints in democratic socities.  But there are also distinctively democratic CONTENTS. 1. One is, T believes, monotheism – unified humanity needs a unified God. 2.  A second is “unity” religions, like Catholicism (p. 424) (Catholicism as a sect.  Strong in America because of the affinity between democratic equality and Catholic uniformity) and Pantheism (426…on its dangers, see end of section: leads to absorbing individual in the whole). Pantheism: what is it: God is Everywhere.  We might call it New Age now.  Occurs more often in democracies: we’re all equal, and so equally small; individuals make less of a difference, so we think of each of us as part of a Whole that is emananting in us.  So w think that Everything is Connected, man.  426.Show the connection between democracy and some forms of submission to authority, since equality can favor UNITY over FREEDOM.  Very dangerous for T, since it destroys our capcity to appreciate the activity of individuals and encourages us to become absorbed in a great mass, and so to give up our individual freedoms for the sake of UNITY.MORALITYDoctrine of perfectibility: I can always make myself better, there are no limits to how good we can become.  This is a GENERAL feature of human condition, differentiates humans from animals (p. 427).  But it is weakened or heightened in different socieites.Aristocratic: you see the world as fixed as it is.  I’m son of a shoe maker, well, I’m a shoe-maker.  I’m going to be the best damn shoe-maker I can, but there’s a limit to what I can become.  I might improve shoe-making techniques.  But I’m not going to change into something else.  Things as they are are pretty good, about as good as we can hope, and we’ll make incremental improvements where we can without rocking the boat.Democratic: no fixed position in society.  Imagine you could be a different person from the one you were born as.  Self-transformation is an accepted part of life, not abhorrent.  Yes, lots of people become worse.  But if anybody becomes better, tend to think that anything is possible.  Bill Clinton.  Barack Obama.  Read p. 428, sailor planned obsolence example.  Making shoddy things as a sign of a moral ideal of human perfection!  If you think humans can’t improve themselves, you’ll make stuff to last!  Computers are a good example.  SCIENCERemember: cultural spirit of democracy is trust only what you see with your eyes.  In science this means: avoid big abstract systems and the weight of tradition.  Stick with the particular and the empirical.  Don’t read the classics over and over.  So democracies tend to encourage people to focus on immediate practical applications of science and on theoretical work that can be directly linked to practice.  Pure, abstract reasoning, long-term meditation that has no reward outside of itself, declines.  Contrast this to the aristocratic tendency to pure thinking about basic first principles, p. 436.  Bottom of same page for democratic tendency to immediate application, industrial technology.So what?  Well, T thinks the decline of meditative thinking can be dangerous, there are more routes to barbarism then being defeated militariy by “barbarians.”  How?  If only think about application, forget about the underlying principles, know that things work, but don’t know WHY.  How many of us know how our cars work or why our email actually gets where it is going.  But if that goes too far, then you can’t invent knew methods any more.  Know the external formulas without having it make any sense.   Easy to control people like that, who just accept given formulas, since they will be totally dependent on the people who do know how thigs work or at least control the existing technology based on old but lost knowledge of how things work.  There’s a Star Trek episode about this, where they find an alien race with super high technology, but doesn’t know how to use it, and an asteroid is coming to hit their planet, but they can’t figure out how to use any of their machines to prevent it.CRAFTSDemocracies care more about useful than beautiful: all are equal, each looking out for himself.  Looking for convenience rather than grandeur.  Does this watch tell time?  Rather than: does this watch express the finest craftsmanship, is it beautifully ornamented with fine details, will it last forever?Democratic society fundamentally alters both production and consumption.Aristocratic Producers and Consumers vs. Democratic Producers  and Consumers.Aristocratic Producer: make things to last.  World doesn’t change.  Your work defines not only yourself, but your whole profession.  The table I make is supposed to demonstrate the quality of all table-makers, going back all the way to the past and all the way forward to the future, since my little lifetime is just one link in the eternal chain of table-makers, of which I am a small part and representation, my children will be the next link, forever.  Aristocratic Consumers: don’t change: aristocrats are in it for the long haul, want a table that can be there 20 generations down the line.  A small group of very sophisticated, wealthy buyers with refined tastes.Democratic Producers: I’m a table-maker today, but maybe something else tomorrow, and my son/daughter probably won’t be in the table business.  So what do I care about representing the eternal guild of table-makers?  I don’t care as much about making quality products built to last as much as I do about making as much money as I can with the least effort.  Democratic Consumers: And consumer demand is always changing, since in democracies people are always social climbing.  Want more than they can afford, so take a table that looks like it might last 30 generations, but will probably fall apart next week.  Or McMansions.  So craftsmen sell cheaper goods, made faster, that are less distinctive, and are mass produced.   Without guild loyalty, they are OK with making inferior quality products, since they’re primary interest is in making money, so they mass produce lower quality, but still acceptable, at least superficially, goods.  Note: Smith’s basic attitude is here a DERIVED consequence of democratization, not just a natural fact.  Read 441.PAINTING AND BOOKSFine arts: aristocracies: a few great paintings.  Democracies: many pretty good paintings.  Paintings focus more on materiality – bodies – than the soul, more imitative.  Note he wasn’t quite right about this, with impressionism and abstraction popping up.Literature: in aristocracies, only a few great books, only a few succeed, written for a highly discriminating audience.  Democracy: big market, so you can do well even without producing a masterpiece.  Lots of mediocre books, designed not to appeal to people who want greatness and depth, but to common tastes.  See the supermarket checkout line or any night of TV for confirmation.  Explosion in “external culture.”  Ref. Simmel.  LANGUAGEAristocracies: words tend to last, stay the same for generations.  Don’t need new words, because there isn’t much novelty.  If you do come to new words, they come from elite sources, like philosophy or poetry, Greek and Latin.  Democracy: always in motion, creates new words like new businesses.  Not only to capture new things, but just for the sake of having a new word.  You know, like how its fun to say “wicked” when you could just say “cool.”  Not only that there are new words.  They tend to about certain topic: come from business, politics, commerce rather than philosophy and poetry.  And from different countries and classes, since the differences are decining.  On total # of English language words vs. German.  Compare dialects and status in North America vs. England.And tend to speak more abstractly, in general ideas, since individual distinction is less.  Our ideals made Obama President, for example.  HISTORIOGRAPHYAristocracies: focus on great deeds of leaders and elites.  History depends on their individual qualities, their ambition, their greed, their love affairs, etc.Democracy: individuals don’t do anything, it is HISTORY, or Fate.  Individuals don’t make things happen, history seems to go forward without anybody sterring the ship.   Can’t discern clear connection between individual action and historical consequences, too complicated, and each of us is insignficanct in comparison to the mass. So talk about ethnicity or geography of “national spirit.”  Again reveals a democratic danger: Obliterates individual action.  Read 471.  Reduces our believe that we, by our actions, can modify our fates.  INDIVIDUALISM AND SOCIAL CONTROL UNDER DEMOCRACYShifting now from discussion of politics and culture to EMOTIONS, passions, that democratic society tends to raise.  Democratic PassionsFirst passion in democratic society: love of equality.  Love.  Love it more than freedom.  What does that mean?First, let’s think about what it would be for freedom and equality to be equal.  Perfect participatory republic.  Nothing happens that each of us does not consent to.  No single ruler, so no tyrant, we are free.  And we are equal.  That is perfection.  But we live usually with much less than that.For example, you can have equality in civil society, but not political equality.  All can be lawyers.  But only men vote, say.  Saw in Marx how you can have political equality but not civil equality.  So freedom and equality are different.  But freedo is a very old idea, and many people in many cultures have desire it with all their hearts.  Not so equality.  Wanting that is pretty new.  It’s built into democracy.Why else do democratic people often prefer equality to freedom?  For one thing: easier to see how demanding freedom can be.  Have to go to meetings all the time, fight in wars; can’t just live your life.  But equality seems pretty easy, and the bad parts of it are pretty remote.  On the other hand, the good stuff that freedom brings takes awhile to see.  OK, so you vote, so you have a say, that’s great.  Why do I care about doing that?  I want roads and clean water.  Equality’s advantages are easy to see: the baron used to get all the special treatment, now he doen’t.  So end up wanting equality more than freedom.  Want both, but if we can only have one, it’s equality…and that means equality as slaves.IndividualismSo passion for equality is the main passion.  But that generates other passions, like: individualism.  My sentiments are directed inward; I want to feel myself.  Not selfishness – that means preferring me to everybody else.  Individualism means more like: my private world is what gives my life meaning, where I can live, enjoy myself with my family.  Imagery of laughing family, rest of world is a jungle.T thinks this is dangerous; threatens public virtue and public spirit.  Don’t care about the common good when your life revolves around your private space at home.    How to analyze individualism and understand how to channel it towards better public ends?  First need to see that:Individualism distinctive to democracies.  Why?  Aristocracies: think in the long term.  What I do now affects countless generations.  Sacrifice my personal enjoyments for the future.  And you have duties to your class – aristocrats sacrifice for one another, for their station in life.  And since life is arranged in a hierarchy, there’s always somebody above you that you owe some kind of loyalty to, and someboy below you you’re supposed to take care of.  So you live your life in relation to things beyond yourself.Democracies: only collective duty seems to be to humanity as a whole.  But that is vague, general.  Who is “humanity”?  Who am I supposed to call up?  Has humanity ever called me for help?  Should I help my station or class or future generations?  All that is changing, I don’t know where I stand in relation to them.  So my loyalty is extended wider, but it is weaker.  But I do have enough for ME, so I worry about maitning myself, and try to be self-sufficient, so I won’t have to have anybody else take care of me, since they’re in the sme situation I am.  So individualism becomes passionate in democracy. Now the question of SOCIAL CONTROL arises.  How do you keep all these passionately individualistic people in line?First, why does it matter?  Why do we need to control individualism.  Answer for T: 1. Generates indifference.  And despots love societies of isolated individuals. It is easy to enslave people who have no common bonds, no associations, no groups they are a part of.   They are divided, and so already conquered, not really even a people.  They are worried about their own lives; who cares about politics?  Leave it to me, the despot says….I’ll take care of you.  Read p. 485.  2. Leads to high levels of melancholy (depression, suicidal tendencies). Chapter 13.  Though democracies often raise living standards of most people, they also generate a pervasive sense of what we might call anxiety or boredom, T calls “melancholy” or “restiveness.”  Why is that?  In democracies, you’re always imaginging yourself as potentially somebody else thiking about how to improve your situation, and not sure if you’re on the right path to doing that.  Your life seems contingent, shifting. Read 512.  Worrying about who am I, what am I doing, is it meaningful, etc.  In aristocracies, where inequalities are a fact of life, don’t worry about this.  But in democracies, it can drive you crazy.  Read 513. 3. And materialism.  Aristocracies: secure in your wealth if you have, know you can’t have wealth if you don’t.  So you don’t worry about it.  Democracies: if you’re poor, you think you can be rich; if you’re rich, you’re worried about becoming poor.  So everybody worried about their material possessions.So individualism needs to be somehow controlled, checked by something else, and the frantic loneliness needs to be somehow translated into some stable structures that give a kind of coherence to your identity.  How will that work?  T’s answer: 1. public involvement.  Read p. 486.  Start to see yourself as connected to others, not independent of them.  Obama example fro community organizing.   Local involvement is better, since everybody can be involved, and see the need in your DAILY life for one another, how much you depend on and can do with each other. 2. Civil Associatoins.  Not political associations, but civil.  Read 489.  Bowling Alone.  Read 490.  Without associations, can be enlightened but will lose freedom, fall back into isolation.  Bowling, bands, farmers markets, neighborhood festivals, knitting clubs, martial arts.  These are opportunities for social pleasures, and for being enlarged, getting outside yourself.  Saw this in TMS.  But T is saying that capacity is in danger in democracy, and without these associations, people might become indifferent, and those social virtues would wither.  Read 491.  a. Science of Association. Consequence of this is that the “mother science” is the science of associations, in democratic societies.  That is, when people start to live under equal conditions, and so tend to turn inward, understanding the condtiiosn under which they interact, socialize, come out of themselves, is the principle question, all other human questions follow from that.  What is the “science of society”?  Sociology!  So sociology becomes the queen of the sciences in democracies, since the sphere of “association” or social interaction becomes a problem, an issue, in democracies in a way that it was taken for granted in aristocracy.  b. Civil and Political Association OK.  Bands and martial clubs are great.  But we’re talking about saving society from despotism, saving civilization!  How is that supposed to work?  Being in bowling clubs trains you to do things with others.  HRD example.  Works in the other direction: if you become politically active with people, you see you can do things together, and you tend to get involved in other, less political ways.   P. 497.  Associations are schools that train in you in the science of association.  Learn sociology there. It’s a strange relationship:  political associations are dangerous, create social factions and division.  But they train you in how to make civil associations; and civil associations are what prevents faction!3. Doctrine of self-interest Well Understood.  A way of channeling individual self-interest into noble outcomes. In aristocracies, where your station in life is set, people tend to worry less about pursuing their self-interested objectives.  Aristocrats will never lose their wealth, so they don’t need to worry about investing and enhancing their private interest.  Peasants will never ever move up, so they don’t think about wealth and scheming to make money as much.   Instead, they are able to worry about grand projects and self-sacrifice for the greater good.  Talking about virtue makes sense.  Democracies: people worry about self-interest and utility much more.  Don’t talk about sacrificing yourself for virtue.  The only way to get people to do good things is to show them that doing good is actually good for you: nothing is a good to me unless it is a good for me.  Even in religion: Pascal’s wager.  Very different from a classical notion of virtue – if X is good, it’s just good, doesn’t matter if it helps you or notAgain, a mixed blessing: makes most people into decent people, but reduces grand sacrifices.  P. 502.  Leads to a kind of Honest Materialism.  Aristoctatic materialism: total debauchery when it happens.  Think of Romans.  Grand scale hedonism.  Most people in democracies worry about material things, but their ambition is lower, less grand.LECTURE 11SOCIAL RELATIONS UNDER DEMOCRACYFUTURE OF DEMOCRACY	REVOLUTIONS	CENTRALIZATIONSOCIAL RELATIONS UNDER DEMOCRACYSYMPATHYManners in aristocratic society: members of same class are as if from one family, feel deep sympathy for one another.  But different classes are very different, think differently, feel differently, are almost like different species.  So don’t have a lot of sympathy.   Does’t mean they didn’t do things for one another: noble was the peasant’s chief, so he was devoted to him.  Peaasant was part of noble’s landholdings, so he was loyal to him.  But the relation was defind not as one of sympathy among persons or humans, but in terms of political status.  Not because of ignorance – people were very sophisticated and refined.  Rather, they just didn’t live with one another in such a way that their fates as persons were intertwined.  Locke example, about “all men being created equal,” but having slaves.Democratic: now ranks are more equal.  Can imagine yourself in place of pretty much all others.  Read 538.  Sound familiar?  TMS. But note a difference: T is saying that sympathy alters in different social situations, and saying that exercising the capacity to place myself in the place of another depends on how my relation to others is defined.   Makes democratic countries full of way more pity and sympathy and compassion than aristocratic ones, who were colder, more distant, harder.   Sympathy becomes a variable that be heightened in different settings. Read 545.Analogy in international sphere. Read p. 539.  The more countries become alike, the less cold they are, the more they exercise reciprocal compassion.  WWII example, Eastern vs. Western fronts.RESERVEAristocracy of Birth: don’t interact across classes much, but when you do, you know where you stand.  Can be open and honest with one another.Aristocracy of Wealth: p. 540: makes “a muted war” throughout the society: people on top try to keep others down, people below try to move up.  Everybody is hiding something from everybody else.  Democratic social conditions: bottom 540.  Without privileges of birth or special rights from wealth, you can meet other people and not be too worried about giving up too much information.  Invite people over, have forthright converstions.  Be who you are.ETIQUETTE	Aristocracy: very specifically defined social positions lead to very formal and complex rules of etiquette.  These clothes for this occasion to see these people, this sort of fork, this level of bow, etc.  Versailles example.  How Descrates died.  Bottom 541.Democracy: no fixed rules about who you are supposed to respect.  So the rules of etiquette or less certain, so disobeying them is less grievous.  So substance of your actions becomes more important than the external forms.   Don’t get offended by slights, since you don’t care about them that much.    And since you’ve got to work together to get anything done, doesn’t pay to worry about perceived putdowns or faux-pas.  SERVICEThere are always rich and poor.  Question is about how relations between rich and poor chage in difference social forms.  Aristocracy: servants are a class.  Born into it, father was a servant, kids will be servants.  And there are classes within the servant ranks: butlers are higher than cooks.  Manor house example.  Can develop into a kind of “servile nobility,” like Batman’s butler – refined, sophisticated, self-commanding, haughty.  Knows where he stands, what he is supposed to do, and is serving at the highest levels.  Also binds masters and servants for generations, part of the same household over centures.  Master views servants as part of himself, and servants see the master’s successes as theirs.  If you’re a servant of a great lord, you feel that lots of regard is owed to you.Democracy: positions are fluid.  Yes, there are masters and servants, but it isn’t always the same individuals, and no guarantee that if you’re born a servant you’ll end up that way, or if you’re born a master you’ll stay that way either.  So there is no separate order of existence among servants, and no special personality type or temperment.  Masters are not as evil and not as grand.Further change: servants become in a way equal to their masters.  In part because there is at least the possibility of becoming a mastery yourself.  But then, more deeply, there is the question why, given this possibility, do you obey at all?  Not because of your birth.  It is because you make a deal – I contract to clean your house, it’s not part of the definition of who I am. Outside of the contract, we’re just two men.  Outside of the service you’ve contracted to provide me – cleaning, whatever – I don’t get to tell you anything.  If I’m your servant, I’m here for now, but will be gone later.Don’t have that same warm domestic bond of lifelong service.  But also don’t have different orders of humanity.  FATHERS/SONSAristocratic/hierarchical: power doesn’t speak directly to governed.  NO direct access society.  Rather, address a few chiefs, elites, important people, and then othes follow.  So, father counted as head of the family, and that meant that the father was the representative of the family to the rest of the political world.  So, social power tells the father what to do, and then he tells sons what to do.  He commands them, they obey.  Reltionship is cold, severe, distant.Connection to the past: father is the link that brings traditions into the present.  Interprets customs and traditions, decides right way to act.  Deferential, respectful, fearful relation.Relations among children: strictly separated by age and sex.  Boys  do this, girls do that.  Eldest some is highest, and all see themselves in his success. Bound together in him as their head.Democracies: direct access society.  Each speaks directly to power, power seeks out each man.  Position of the father is weakened, less important.  Father is more or less like rest of family, just older and richer.  Not essentially different. Past is information not a rule.  You use it to judge yourself.  Power and fear of father declines.  Relations become more tender, less based on command, more on love and advice.   Relations among children: ranks not predetermined by age and sex.  Develop intimate bond based on common experiences, which generate shared memories and mutual sympathies.  GENDERDemocracy elevantes women to equal of men.  T’s interpretaiotn of America holds that Americans had functional differentiation but equal respect.  Read p. 576.  One form of feminism, which says that men and women have many similar capacities, but also different capacities, and it’s a mistake to put everybody in the same box.  Rather, better to find ways to let distinctively feminine and distinctively masculine experiences have their place.SCENES/CLIQUESDemocracy makes everybody equal, but not homogenous.  Don’t have have a totally common existence.  There are always difference in taste and education, and people will always find some way to have a good time with people they like having a good time with.  Read. 577 on how politics can’t control this.In democratic politics, gather to make decisions about collective actions on grand scale.  But join in much smaller groups for amusement and intertainment.  Read 577.  Creates strong insiders and outsides – you’re in our scene, a part of our bowling scene, goth scene, metal scene, art scene, whatever, or you’re not.  Can end up with many little cliques based on tastes – your life revolves around Star Trek conventions and Hannah Montana fan clubs or boutique hopping.  So you associate only or mostly with people like you.  Internet example – mostly read blogs and look at youtubes of people who share your tastes.  Or facebook.  In aristocracy, if you’re in a certain class, you’re there by birth, not taste, so you’ve got to learn to deal wil people who have different temperaments than you do.  In democracy, if you’re not cool, in a wide sense, I don’t have to hang out with you.  See you later.  Can lead to lots of classifications about who is cool and who is not that are pretty arbirtray – do you know the latest bands, for example.  Indie shirt example: I know bands that don’t exist yet.  Read p. 578.NATIONAL VANITYDemocracy increase national vanity.  Not sure about your merit, so want to have it confirmed to you all the time.  Many people are always just rising up to higher levels in society, and they are, in a way, surprised by what they can do, and they want to show off and have others say how great they are.  Also, since they just got there, they know things can turn away, and so want everybody to notice how great they are.  So vanity comes from a sense of the fragility of your position in democracy.In aristocracies, you know hwere you stand, and what your privleges, or lack of them, are.  So you can have a calm sense of superiority, without having to constantly have it confirmed.  SOCIAL DIVERSITYDemocracies look like they contain the most novelty and difference, as there are always new possiblities and styles emerging, since no inherent limits to what you cann be, do, or feel.  But, in the long –term, it is really pretty monotonous and boring, T thinks.  Why?Aristocracies: everybody is assigned a fixed spot.  Nothing really moves or changes much.  But the feelings and ideas and passions and habits of different people in different positions are vastly different.  There is a distinct way of life in each city that is very different (French small town example); distinct ways of life for each occupation; for each gender; for each of pretty much any division you can imagine.Democracies: all the distinctions melt away.  Yes, everything is spinning around all the time, and everybody has some kind of scheme or plan, but the story-line is the same: poor boy makes it rich, country bumpkin moves to the city, etc.  Usually the story is about trying to get rich.  New boss same as old boss, as they say.  Not accidental: the more you lose other connectiosn to people rooted in common class or ethnicity or your family, which you can rely on to influence people and generate trust, the more you turn to money as a way of gaining help from people – don’t call your friends to get your business going, but hire people.  So wealth as an object of ambition is connected to democratic social condtions, not built into human nature.  Read p. 587.Result of this: money becomes the typical underlying script to most great adventures, making them all have the same flavor.  New products might be very different, but there is some similarity.  Becomes even more routinized and regular because most moneymaking happens through industry rather than war or coups or something.  And success in industry means you’ve got to control yourself, plan long term, do the same thing over and over.  So again, less variety and eccentricity.Leads to a world that is becoming more and more homogenous.  Starbucks everywhere, no local book stores.  Read 588.HONORMore particular than morality, which is universal standars of right or wrong.  Honor is more like: you can’t treat me this way, because of the particular sort of person you or I am.  Violate the honor of a gentleman or a woman, for example.  Linked to particular rules rooted in lifestyle and demands of a particular group of people that is to be protected and praised.  Aristocratic honor: certain virtues and vices linked only with who is doing them, not with just their moral qualities.  Aristocrats might consider peasants to be inferior species – and so not dishonorable for an aristocratic men to have a one night stand with a peasant – who care?  But to marry a peasong – that’s bad.  More generally, when you have an elite class defined by birth, they are likely to have an ethical code designed to allow them to demonstrate their greatness and superirotiy.  The main way is in military courage, since, as we saw in Smith, the whole feudal society depending on war and military strength.  Read 591.  Explains how little slights would lead to duels.  Southern beanball example.  Note about how this got everybody into trouble in WWI when you started to have a democratic war.On the other hand, in aristocratic societies, your country/nation becomes less of an issue for honor – you don’t get as offended when your country is slighted and attacking your own country is not really very dishonorable in so far as you’re attacking your country.  It is dishonorable to attack your own king, but that’s because power works through networks of particular people, not as an expression of national unity.  In Democracies: in general, honor culture is weaker.  Since your relations can constantly change, it is less clear who “your people are,” and so it is less clear who you are supposed to stand up for or what it would mean to have your honor tarnished.  Also, you are way more likely to melt into the crowd.  In aristocracies, everybody knows everybody else personally – aristocrats and peasants (in small towns), so everybody is watching you, you are trying to maintain your rep.  But in big modern cities, you can melt away.  If some guy insults you in a bar, you leave, and never see him again.But there is a certain kind of democratic honor. tend to value industry and commerce, for reasons we already saw.  This makes it honorable to be an ordered, regular, self-controlled people with long-range plans.  Being flashy or impulsive and overly grand or having an irregular temperment that gives over to moods and unpredictable passions or drinking or philandering is dishonorable.What would have been called greed for aristocratic nobles is now valued as a kind of virtue.  Or, more generally, the kind of willingness to take commercial risks that might not pan out is a kind of virtue, somewhat analogous to martial courage.  You’re not quite honorable unless you’re willing to role the dice and start your business, and you probably are going to have some scars to prove it.  Silicon valley example.  P. 594.  It isn’t shameful to go bankrupt, but a mark of your virtue and risktaking, whereas for an aristocrat it would be awful.  So both aristocrat and democrat value courage, but have a different interpretiaotn aobut what courage is.  Courage to fail, to be alone, to not be quite sure who you are or if you’re every going to make it, to be open to self-doubt in a way that it doesn’t debilitate you or stop you from getting up and trying something new, to face up to your limits in a way that doesn’t debilitate you but sees boredom and anxiety and uncertainty as an opportunity to take a new direction rather than to curl up in a ball in your room. All of that would be incomprehensible to the aristocrat, who sees courage as facing up to a clearly defined enemy – I’m here, I know who I am, you’re there, I know who you are, let’s fight.  Even worrying about where you stand would be a kind of cowardice, whereas in democracies it becomes a kind of courage to face up to the unknown, take a risk that could break you apart, redefine who you are, and go on.  Bacon on the Pillars of Hercules, and Odysseus.   So it ends up being dishonorable to be lazy and idle, to just sit around and take the world in.  You need some project or plan.  Whereas for aristocrats, getting involved is bad, beneath them, so they just stay idle to stay aloof from work and commerce.So there is still honor and heroism and courage in democratic, modern societies, but it is different.  Less defined rules, and fewer of them, since fewer distinct classes that are less clearly separated.  Can’t agree on a code of honor or a set of rules for how you’re supposed to treat others. Miss Manners example. You are less on display as a particular individual, but more just one of the crowd, so much easier to do things that nobody notices or cares about. Aristocratic SocietyDemocratic SocietySympathyHigh in-class; low between-class.  Generosity/Loyalty between classesGeneral, for all mankind, less for particular people. [give money for human rights; won’t help your neighbor]reserveOf birth: rare but lowOf wealth: highlowServiceHereditary; servant nobility; intimacy between masters and servantscontractualParents/ChildrenCold, distant, formal.  Obedience/Command. Deference to authority and tradition.Warm, intimate, rooted in love and advice.  Past as information.Siblings.Formal, based in interest.Open; shared experiences Cliques/ScenesRooted in birth, not tastes and personalities.Lifestyle enclavesSocial DiversityHighLowHonourHigh, military glory, less nationalistLower in general; courage to failRACE RELATIONSThese changes in social relations are important. But Tocqueville singled out a particular type of social relation as distinct from the others, which he thought had profound significance for understanding not only the nature and future of north American democracy, but of some of the inherent problems or tensions of democracy as such. Race relations.You can see this just by noticing this quotation: These two races (black and white) are fastened to each other without intermin- gling; and they are alike unable to separate entirely or to combine. The most for- midable of the ills that threaten the future of the Union arises from this “primary fact”; and in contemplating...the future da gers of the United States, the observer is invariably led back to it (DA I: 356) This is a sobering statement. Tocqueville saw already before 1850, before the civil war, that the issue of slavery, and the relations between whites and blacks, would prove fundamental to the future of the USA. He himself was a staunch abolitionist, and his travel companion, Beaumont, wrote some of the most important works in Europe exposing the horrors of american slavery and arguing for abolition. But he was not optimistic about future of race relations in the USA even after abolition, and predicted that this would be perhaps the defining and maybe unsurmountable challenge of the union. T discusses these issues in a famous and controversial chapter, on what he called “The Three Races in America,’ by which he meant white Europeans, people of African descent, and the indigenous peoples of north America. Again people have written whole books on just this chapter, but a couple of things are wroth stressing in our context, starting with the reception history of the chapter.First, recent scholarship has shown that this chapter  has had a long history of discussion among black journalists and activists and intellectuals. The key finding of this scholarship is that over time D in America became canonized as a touchstone, though reactions to it changed. T was very pessimistic about race relations in America, in particular becuase he thought that what he called the entrenched “prejudices” of white americans would make true equality and integration very difficult, even after slavery would be ended. Early abolitionsits found this dismaying, but in the post civil war period, it provided insight into why progress was not as great as many had hoped for. That disturbing revelation drew more to read Tocqueville and use his chapter as a touchstone for reflecting on why racial integration and equality is so challenging, compared to other sources of inequality. A second interesting piece of reception history. Especially during the Cold War period, the English translations just omitted the chapter. That is somehow telling, isn’t it: there was a collective effort to just push these issues aside. This was bound up with cold war politics of the day. Tocqueville was appropriated by middle to right intellectuals, looking to make the case about the dangers of totalitarian governments (we’ll see the basis of that soon) and the extent to which USA had built checks against those dangers.  In that context, a long chapter on the foundational flaws of American society was not seen as conducive to the effort to paint America as the good guy in history. So they just didn’t include it! In the past 30 years or so, however, translations have all included the entire book. This has led to a revised understanding of the chapter and T’s overall thinking on the issues of race. Broadly speaking, this led a number of scholars to argue that T is one of the first “critical race theorists” who saw how deeply rooted some form of white supremacy is in purportedly democratic institutions. In any case, the point is it is a complex and rich chapter, and we won’t be able to do justice to all of its intricacies here. I want to focus on three key things, which we can understand as three different ways of interpreting what T is doing in this chapter.1. Slavery and racial hierarchy as legacy of pre-democratic past. This is in many ways the standard or at least traditional interpretation. And you can see where it would come from. We’ve been defining “pre democratic” feudal or aristocratic social relations as those in which your life chances and social position are determined by birth.  Certainly slavery based on race seems be like that. So would the institutions of Jim Crow, such as separate schools or neighbourhoods or restaurants for whites and blacks, enforced for example by what were known as “racial covenants” that purposively excluded usually blacks and jews. So all that sounds sort of like life under a feudal or aristocratic order. And so many have interpreted T as not really being so attentive to the reality of racial domination/hierarchy, based on the idea that the tidal wave of democracy we have been talking about would eventually just wash it away, like it has other vestiges of the hierarchical past.But T didn’t see it that way, as the quote I read already indicates. But the real differences comes in if we note how he contrasts ANCIENT VS MODERN SLAVERY. Now, to be clear, slavery is bad wherever it appears, and you never would want to be a slave. But the practice of ancient slavery, say in Rome, is really quite different from the form practiced in Virginia or Georgia. In the ancient version, slaves would typically be taken from survivors of wars, and brought back to Rome to serve as servants in households. It would often not be for life, and many slaves would be able to earn their freedom and become full fledged roman citizens. In fact, this sort of pathway to citizenship from slavery was one of the ways that rome ended up incoroporating more and more people into its empire. Moreover, slaves would often be tasked to perform very important functions. Many of the great scholars and teachers and philosophers of the day were actually slaves, and understood by their masters to have developed their minds much further than they had. Now, let me re-iterate, it still was not so great to be a roman slave. Still, compare it to the institution of slavery in Georgia or Virginia, and you notice something very different. In those contexts, the institution sought to dehumanize slaves. The term for this is ABJECTION. The system was geared toward denying slaves the means to cultivate their capacities so that the masters would not have to see their humanity. This is where the writings of Frederic Douglass are so powerful. Douglass was one of the great writers of the 19th century, and gave an incredibly powerful depiction of what it was like to be a slave, from the inside. One of the true giants in the history of black letters. In our context, he gives us a window into the particularly dehumanizing dimension of modern slavery. Here let’s read a few passages from his “Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass” that bring this home. The book tells Douglass’ story in his own words. Right at the beginning, he brings out the ways in which American slaves had been placed in this position of abjection. For example, he was never told when he was born. . I do not remember to have ever met a slave who could tell of his birthday. They seldom come nearer to it than planting-time, harvest-time, cherry-time, spring-time, or fall-time. A want of information concerning my own was a source of unhappiness to me even during childhood. The white children could tell their ages. I could not tell why I ought to be deprived of the same privilege. I was not allowed to make any inquiries of my master concerning it. He deemed all such inquiries on the part of a slave improper and impertinent, and evidence of a restless spirit. The nearest estimate I can give makes me now between twenty-seven and twenty-eight years of age. I come to this, from hearing my master say, some time during 1835, I was about seventeen years old. This is one way in which one of the sources of a person’s individuality and humanity was taken – remember our discussion of “happy birthday”,” each person having their own special day. This was taken from Douglass. Even more, Douglass was separated in his infancy from his mother. My mother and I were separated when I was but an infant, before I knew her as my mother. It is a common custom, in the part of Maryland from which I ran away, to part children from their mothers at a very early This again was a way of attacking the very basis of a common notion of humanity, by ripping families apart. It goes further. One of the key moments in the story is when he moved from a plantation in the countryside into a household in the city. There he had a new master and mistress. Initially, the mistress was kind to him, and helped him to learn how to read: “My early instruction was all out of place. The crouching servility, usually so acceptable a quality in a slave, did not answer when manifested toward her. Her favor was not gained by it; she seemed to be disturbed by it. She did not deem it impudent or unmannerly for a slave to look her in the face. The meanest slave was put fully at ease in her presence, and none left without feeling better for having seen her. Her face was made of heavenly smiles, and her voice of tranquil music.”But Douglass points out that this could not last. But, alas! this kind heart had but a short time to remain such. The fatal poison of irresponsible power was already in her hands, and soon commenced its infernal work. That cheerful eye, under the influence of slavery, soon became red with rage; that voice, made all of sweet accord, changed to one of harsh and horrid discord; and that angelic face gave place to that of a demon. In particular, D goes on to describe what the husband told her. Specifically, that you should never teach a slave to read, since it would give them too many ideas, and make them unfit for slavery and harder to “manage” and control. After that, the wife and husband were united in treating him harshly, and D describes in graphic detail what that felt like.These words sank deep into my heart, stirred up sentiments within that lay slumbering, and called into existence an entirely new train of thought. It was a new and special revelation, explaining dark and mysterious things, with which my youthful understanding had struggled, but struggled in vain. I now understood what had been to me a most perplexing difficulty, to wit, the white man's power to enslave the black man. IN other words, D realized that the force of modern slavery rested on denying even the most basic forms of education to slaves. Which in turn led Douglass to want to learn to read and educate himself even more, and in turn he did so and started teaching his friends. It gave me the best assurance that I might rely with the utmost confidence on the results which, he said, would flow from teaching me to read. What he most dreaded, that I most desired. What he most loved, that I most hated. That which to him was a great evil, to be carefully shunned, was to me a great good, to be diligently sought; and the argument which he so warmly urged, against my learning to read, only served to inspire me with a desire and determination to learn. In learning to read, I owe almost as much to the bitter opposition of my master, as to the kindly aid of my mistress. I acknowledge the benefit of both. Now, the point of all of this is to show that the first interpretation can’t be the whole story. There has to something somehow modern about slavery.2. Two traditions. A second interpretation says that yes, slavery is a modern phenomenon, but it co-exists with the democratic tradition. You have two traditions in parallel. One, largely, in the US South. The other in the North and in Canada. There is some evidence for this in Tocqueville. He actually refers to a kind of dual founding of the USA, in 1776 and 1623. 1623 is an interesting date, since it is the date he thought the first slave ship arrived from Africa. Now contemporary scholarship thinks the accurate date is 1619. This is the basis for the NYT’s 1619 project, which you might have heard of. It tries to retell the story of America from the point of view of 1619 as its starting point, and from the point of view of the experiences of black americans. Tocqueville in a way was already writing the 1619 project back in the 1830s! And yet, he didn’t really fully buy into the two traditions thesis. The problem, he thought, is that it doesn’t take seriously enough the depth of the prejudice built into institutions in the North. It lets the north off the hook by displacing all the problems onto the south. His evidence for this was residential segregation. Actually, if you look at residential segregation, there has often been much LESS in the south than in the north or Canada. That is largely because the hierarchy was so explicit in the south. White and blacks could live nearby, and whites were so secure in the entrenched legal and social priveleges, that they didn’t need to “worry” about blacks.   In the north, they worried, and that is where you saw both formal and informal measures that produced racially segregated neighbourhoods. I mentioned some of them before, explicitly formal racial covenants, or later less explicit practices such as what became known as white flight. E.g. when a critical mass of black people move into a white neighbourhood, even in the supposedly more enlightened north, the white people tend to move away.There’s more to be said about this but the theoretical point is clear. For T, it isn’t enough to say “bad south good north.” The problem runs deeper.3. Problem of democracy. The third, and in many ways most challenging and troubling one, is that, like with some of the other problems we have discussed, there is at least a tendency or potential for racial hierarchy built into democracy. What is T’s argument for that? This arises from a particular combination of some of the dimensions of democracy we’ve already discussed:a. Anxiety. Remember: democracy creates anxiety, because people don’t know exactly where they stand,. It is more open, which means you need to figure out your own life without a net, so to speak. That can be exhilirating, but it can also be terrifying. Many people seek a net. What kind of a net?b. Tyranny of majority. Now add tyranny of majority to that anxiety. Remember, that is also an essential feature of democracy: majority rules. So, the majority will be tempted to build some kind of floor beneath which they cannot fall. This in turn becomes a ceiling above which minorities cannot raise. This ceiling/floor solves the problem of anxiety for the majority: it tells the white majority that, no matter how far you might fall, at least you will not be black. In this way, T shows that racism is not just emotional but what we now call structural. c. Equality. The ideal of equality in turn makes the situation that much worse. Really? Equality makes it worse? Yes, T argues. Again think about the nature of slavery in an aristocratic or hierarchical society that understands itself as such. In that society, it doesn’t feel like a problem to treat some people as inferior to others, because that is how you understand the world to be. Therefore, to make somebody a slave, you don’t need to degrade them. A roman aristocratic knew he was just born superior to his slaves, so he didn’t care if they were more educated or even smarter than he was. But if you say and believe “all are created equal” and then you have slaves, or even more generally there are groups of people who are clearly not treated equal, how do you justify that to yourself? T saw that the only way to do so would be to dehumanize those on the bottom of the hierarchy. IF they aren’t fully human, then you aren’t denying them their equal rights as human beings, from the perspective of the minority. Hence the drive toward brutality and the denial of education is not just coming from a kind of personal hatred of black people by whites. The underlying forces produce such hatred, but the fundamental source is from these interlocking processes that at least have the potential to develop in this direction in democracies.So here we have a very powerful theory of why racial hierarchy occurs, and becomes very brutal, in democratic societies. It is not random, but can grow out of its core institutions: freedom, and the anxiety it produces, the tyranny of the majority, and the suppression of minorities it produces, and equality, and the dehumanization it can produce to account for those who are not equal. This isn’t really a happy story and T has no magical solution. This is in keeping with what we’ve seen. His picture of democracy is almost tragic: it is the best, but it also can create the worst. But that is also maybe a realistic way to see the world. Every human institution is full of tensions, none is perfect, even democracy, and if we are going to learn how to make it work, we have to be able to face up to that fact, and learn to see how sometimes behind pretensions to freedom and equality there lies the exercise of tyranny and domination. Only in that way can sustain commitment to the sorts of institutions that we’ve identified as checking this tendencies, by remaining always vigilant to the potential for democratic ideals to create their dark side. THE FUTURE OF DEMOCRATIC POLITICSTocqueville as a kind of prophet here, foretelling what will happen in the future of democracies, or, more generally, as social conditions in societies become less aristocratic and more equal.  Amazingly prescient.FEWER REVOLUTIONSMight seem like there would be more revolutions – everything is always changing, after all.  But there won’t be, T says.  Why?1.  Fewer in poverty.  First, revolutions are usually fought for equality or to get rid of it, usually poor against rich or rich to put down poor.  But if you have a society in which everybody has some stake, probably won’t be revolution – note how Marx needed the proletarians as a revolutionary class.  In democracies, don’t have an organized giant class of poor or a class of rich with special legal rights.  2.  Middle-class property holders.  Second, Most people are property owners, anyway, so revolution would be bad for them.  Most people become middle-class, and the middle-class is the least revolutionary of all.  Aristocrats don’t care about money since they have so much, so sometimes there ready to try something radical.  Poor have nothing to lose.  But middle-class have enough money to care about keeping it but not enough to care about other stuff.   And their property is not in the land, but is usually mobile, less secure, far-flung. Read 608.3.  Commercial habits.  Third, commercial habits are anti-revolutionary.  Makes people want predictable markets. 4.  Lack of public spirit.  Fourth, anyway, most people don’t really care enough about big political or human issues to get worked up.  Got your projects, your little businesses, and that’s that.  My mom organizing auto workers.    Read 610.Note how T predicted, in a way, the revolutionary aspects of the civil rights movement in the ‘60’s over 100 year before it happened.  P. 611.  Also true in the realm of ideas, even though it might seem otherwise.  1.  Similar opinions.  First, Most people are alike, and so most have similar ideas.  2.  Incremental innovation.  Second, you don’t have lightening flashes of new ideas brought down from above, where a charismatic great innovator has some new message and everybody just accepts it.  That’s how Weber thought, we’ll see, and it’s linked with a more elitist society.  Democratic innovation happens more incrementally, since innovations can’t just be accepted by a few elites and then handed down to everybody else.  Democracies, everybody has to be convinced one by one, and that is much more gradual, much less revolutionary.  3.  Domestic concerns.  Third, everybody is really into their jobs and families, so don’t really spend time thinking about great new ideas.  4.  Conformism.  Fourth, public opinion has so much weight.  You’re just one little person, and if everybody is thining something, even if its wrong or you think its crazy, hard to resist.  P. 615.  What does all this mean?  T is afraid in the future not of perpetual revolution, but of stagnation.  Less grand renewals of national identity, more just going along like you’ve gone along, less great ideas, and if you have them, they will be about desensitizing you to pain and keeping your “regular.”  Read 616.  CENTRALIZATION OF POWERDemocracies tend to favor uniform, abstract ideas and government.  So tendency to one central set of laws that applies to all equally.  Very few, as we saw, secondary institutions in between individuals and government. .  Individuals can’t get much done alone.  So imagine that central government can solve their problems.  State provides welfare, rather than churches or families or neighbors.  If you fall onto hard times, go to the state, not your church, your neighbors, a rich uncle.  State takes children away from families for 8 hrs a day – in school.  Standardized curriculum.  Goes even further, into your souls. Birth control implants.  Library records, files on who you call and who you email.  Welfare state dependence.  Ban smoking in bars, now threatening in parks.  Banning soda, trans-fats.  Story about trucker arrested for smoking in his truck.Central banks gather most people’s wealth in the hands of the central government. Read 641, 653.  Industrial production requires huge natural resources, and so confiscate land holdings to serve it for roads, ports, etc, and gov starts employing tons of people.  657.Not only ideas about equal treatment, but your feelings in democracy that tend to lead you to centralization.  Tend to fall back into yourself, as we saw, and feel for yourself first and only.  So don’t get involved in common, public affairs.  Just leave it to Somebody Else, the central government.  And since you hate seeing one person privileged over another, tend to take away special priveleges of individuals, and give them all to the sovereign power – not to indeividuals, but to abstract offices that don’t have faces.  So you start to LIKE seeing the central government take control and tell everybody how to raise their children or run their marriage, as it reaffirms that nobody is special.  So you end up with a very strange kind of despotism: read 662.  Very nice while you get injected with the happy drugs.  Our masters don’t really oppress up, but they are like our parents.  But they arne’t like parents, since they don’t want us to grow up and take charge fo our own lives andn collective destiny, but rather want us to stay like children.  Bush after 9/11 askign everybody to go shopping example.Now, not inevitable.  Varies according to a number of dimensions.If you live in a country with a vigorous tradiitonof liberty, more likely to hang onto participation in public life.  If you enter into democratic society through a violent revolution, you’re more likely to end up giving absolute power to a central authority, since the revolution wipes away all the local elites.  If you enter into democratic society in a country with low education, less likely to organize secondary institutions, and more likely to accept authority from above and few central government as the people who “know what they’re doing.”  Poland example.Wars tend to increase centralization, so if a democratic society is forced into lots of wars, its going to end up more centralized.  And threats of instability, like war on terror.  Massive increase in government intrusion into daily life justified by that.  Defenses:Can create secondary bodies, as we saw.  Local groups.  Associations, as we sawy.Freedom of press.  P. 668.dont need it in aristocracy because you have independent way of making your greivances known.  Press is only way to get your complaints heard.  Independent judiciary.Keep some formal rules about what can be done.  Rules of order, etc.  Despots want to get rid of those.