Wollstonecraft theory of alienation1. Theory of sexual alienation2. Theory of non-domination3. Marriage as virtue vs. utilityWollstonecraft was born 1759 in Spitalfields, London.[1]  Although her family had a comfortable income when she was a child, her father gradually squandered it on speculative projects. Consequently, the family became financially unstable and they were frequently forced to move during Wollstonecraft's youth.[3] The family's financial situation eventually became so dire that Wollstonecraft's father compelled her to turn over money that she would have inherited at her maturity. Moreover, he was apparently a violent man who would beat his wife in drunken rages. As a teenager, Wollstonecraft used to lie outside the door of her mother's bedroom to protect her.[4] Wollstonecraft played a similar maternal role for her sisters, Everina and Eliza, throughout her life. For example, in a defining moment in 1784, she convinced Eliza, who was suffering from what was probably postpartum depression, to leave her husband and infant; Wollstonecraft made all of the arrangements for Eliza to flee, demonstrating her willingness to challenge social norms. The human costs, however, were severe: her sister suffered social condemnation and, because she could not remarry, was doomed to a life of poverty and hard work.[5]Two friendships shaped Wollstonecraft's early life. The first was with Jane Arden in Beverley. The two frequently read books together and attended lectures presented by Arden's father, a self-styled philosopher and scientist. Wollstonecraft revelled in the intellectual atmosphere of the Arden household and valued her friendship with Arden greatly, sometimes to the point of being emotionally possessive. Wollstonecraft wrote to her: "I have formed romantic notions of friendship ... I am a little singular in my thoughts of love and friendship; I must have the first place or none."[6] In some of Wollstonecraft's letters to Arden, she reveals the volatile and depressive emotions that would haunt her throughout her life.[7] The second and more important friendship was with Fanny (Frances) Blood, introduced to Wollstonecraft by the Clares, a couple in Hoxton who became parental figures to her; Wollstonecraft credited Blood with opening her mind.[8]Unhappy with her home life, Wollstonecraft struck out on her own in 1778 and accepted a job as a lady's companion to Sarah Dawson, a widow living in Bath. However, Wollstonecraft had trouble getting along with the irascible woman (an experience she drew on when describing the drawbacks of such a position in Thoughts on the Education of Daughters, 1787). In 1780 she returned home upon being called back to care for her dying mother.[9] Rather than return to Dawson's employ after the death of her mother, Wollstonecraft moved in with the Bloods. She realized during the two years she spent with the family that she had idealized Blood, who was more invested in traditional feminine values than was Wollstonecraft. But Wollstonecraft remained dedicated to Fanny and her family throughout her life, frequently giving pecuniary assistance to Blood's brother for example.[10]Wollstonecraft had envisioned living in a female utopia with Blood; they made plans to rent rooms together and support each other emotionally and financially, but this dream collapsed under economic realities. In order to make a living, Wollstonecraft, her sisters, and Blood set up a school together in Newington Green, a Dissenting community. Blood soon became engaged and, after her marriage, moved to Lisbon Portugal with her husband, Hugh Skeys, in hopes that it would improve her health which had always been precarious.[11] Despite the change of surroundings Blood's health further deteriorated when she became pregnant, and in 1785 Wollstonecraft left the school and followed Blood to nurse her, but to no avail.[12] Moreover, her abandonment of the school led to its failure.[13] Blood's death devastated Wollstonecraft and was part of the inspiration for her first novel, Mary: A Fiction (1788).[14]After Blood's death in 1785, Wollstonecraft's friends helped her obtain a position as governess to the daughters of the Anglo-IrishKingsborough family in Ireland. Although she could not get along with Lady Kingsborough,[15] the children found her an inspiring instructor; Margaret King would later say she 'had freed her mind from all superstitions'.[16] Some of Wollstonecraft's experiences during this year would make their way into her only children's book, Original Stories from Real Life (1788).[17]Frustrated by the limited career options open to respectable yet poor women—an impediment which Wollstonecraft eloquently describes in the chapter of Thoughts on the Education of Daughters entitled 'Unfortunate Situation of Females, Fashionably Educated, and Left Without a Fortune'—she decided, after only a year as a governess, to embark upon a career as an author. This was a radical choice, since, at the time, few women could support themselves by writing. As she wrote to her sister Everina in 1787, she was trying to become 'the first of a new genus'.[18] She moved to London and, assisted by the liberal publisher Joseph Johnson, found a place to live and work to support herself.[19] She learned French and German and translated texts,[20] most notably Of the Importance of Religious Opinions by Jacques Necker and Elements of Morality, for the Use of Children by Christian Gotthilf Salzmann. She also wrote reviews, primarily of novels, for Johnson's periodical, the Analytical Review. Wollstonecraft's intellectual universe expanded during this time, not only from the reading that she did for her reviews but also from the company she kept: she attended Johnson's famous dinners and met such luminaries as the radical pamphleteer Thomas Paine and the philosopher William Godwin. The first time Godwin and Wollstonecraft met, they were disappointed in each other. Godwin had come to hear Paine, but Wollstonecraft assailed him all night long, disagreeing with him on nearly every subject. Johnson himself, however, became much more than a friend; she described him in her letters as a father and a brother.[21]In London, Wollstonecraft lived on Dolben Street, in Southwark; an up-and-coming area following the opening of the first Blackfriars Bridge in 1769.[22]While in London, Wollstonecraft pursued a relationship with the artist Henry Fuseli, even though he was already married. She was, she wrote, enraptured by his genius, 'the grandeur of his soul, that quickness of comprehension, and lovely sympathy'.[23] She proposed a platonic living arrangement with Fuseli and his wife, but Fuseli's wife was appalled, and he broke off the relationship with Wollstonecraft.[24] After Fuseli's rejection, Wollstonecraft decided to travel to France to escape the humiliation of the incident, and to participate in the revolutionary events that she had just celebrated in her recent Vindication of the Rights of Men (1790). She had written the Rights of Men in response to the Whig MP Edmund Burke's politically conservative critique of the French Revolution in Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) and it made her famous overnight. Reflections on the Revolution in France was published on 1 November 1790, and so angered Wollstonecraft that she spent the rest of the month writing her rebuttal. A Vindication of the Rights of Men, in a Letter to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke was published on 29 November 1790, initially anonymously;[25] the second edition of A Vindication of the Rights of Men was published on 18 December, and this time the publisher revealed Wollstonecraft as the author.[25]Wollstonecraft called the French Revolution a 'glorious chance to obtain more virtue and happiness than hitherto blessed our globe'.[26]Against Burke's dismissal of the Third Estate as men of no account, Wollstonecraft wrote, 'Time may show, that this obscure throng knew more of the human heart and of legislation than the profligates of rank, emasculated by hereditary effeminacy'.[26] About the events of 5–6 October 1789, when the royal family was marched from Versailles to Paris by a group of angry housewives, Burke praised Queen Marie Antoinette as a symbol of the refined elegance of the ancien régime, who was surrounded by 'furies from hell, in the abused shape of the vilest of women'.[26] Wollstonecraft by contrast wrote of the same event: 'Probably you [Burke] mean women who gained a livelihood by selling vegetables or fish, who never had any advantages of education'.[26]Wollstonecraft was compared with such leading lights as the theologian and controversialist Joseph Priestley and Paine, whose Rights of Man (1791) would prove to be the most popular of the responses to Burke. She pursued the ideas she had outlined in Rights of Men in A Vindication of the Rights of Woman (1792), her most famous and influential work.[27] Wollstonecraft's fame extended across the English channel, for when the French statesmen Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-Périgord visited London in 1792, he visited her, during which she asked that French girls be given the same right to an education that French boys were being offered by the new regime in France.[28]Wollstonecraft left for Paris in December 1792 and arrived about a month before Louis XVI was guillotined. Britain and France were on the brink of war when she left for Paris, and many advised her not to go.[29] France was in turmoil. She sought out other British visitors such as Helen Maria Williams and joined the circle of expatriates then in the city.[30] During her time in Paris, Wollstonecraft associated mostly with the moderate Girondins rather than the more radical Jacobins.[31] It was indicative that when Archibald Hamilton Rowan, the United Irishman, encountered her in the city in 1794 it was at a post-Terror festival in honour of the moderate revolutionary leader Mirabeau, who had been a great hero for Irish and English radicals before his death (from natural causes) in April 1791.[32]On 26 December 1792, Wollstonecraft saw the former king, Louis XVI, being taken to be tried before the National Assembly, and much to her own surprise, found 'the tears flow[ing] insensibly from my eyes, when I saw Louis sitting, with more dignity than I expected from his character, in a hackney coach going to meet death, where so many of his race have triumphed'.[31]France declared war on Britain in February 1793. Wollstonecraft tried to leave France for Switzerland but was denied permission.[33] In March, the Jacobin-dominated Committee of Public Safety came to power, instituting a totalitarian regime meant to mobilise France for the first 'total war'.Life became very difficult for foreigners in France.[34] At first, they were put under police surveillance and, to get a residency permit, had to produce six written statements from Frenchmen testifying to their loyalty to the republic. Then, on 12 April 1793, all foreigners were forbidden to leave France.[35] Despite her sympathy for the revolution, life for Wollstonecraft become very uncomfortable, all the more so as the Girondins had lost out to the Jacobins.[35] Some of Wollstonecraft's French friends lost their heads to the guillotine as the Jacobins set out to annihilate their enemies.[35]Having just written the Rights of Woman, Wollstonecraft was determined to put her ideas to the test, and in the stimulating intellectual atmosphere of the French Revolution, she attempted her most experimental romantic attachment yet: she met and fell passionately in love with Gilbert Imlay, an American adventurer. Wollstonecraft put her own principles in practice by sleeping with Imlay even though they were not married, which was unacceptable behavior from a 'respectable' British woman.[35] Whether or not she was interested in marriage, he was not, and she appears to have fallen in love with an idealisation of the man. Despite her rejection of the sexual component of relationships in the Rights of Woman, Wollstonecraft discovered that Imlay awakened her interest in sex.[36]Wollstonecraft was to a certain extent disillusioned by what she saw in France, writing that the people under the republic still behaved slavishly to those who held power while the government remained 'venal' and 'brutal'.[34] Despite her disenchantment, Wollstonecraft wrote:I cannot yet give up the hope, that a fairer day is dawning on Europe, though I must hesitatingly observe, that little is to be expected from the narrow principle of commerce, which seems everywhere to be shoving aside the point of honour of the noblesse [nobility]. For the same pride of office, the same desire of power are still visible; with this aggravation, that, fearing to return to obscurity, after having but just acquired a relish for distinction, each hero, or philosopher, for all are dubbed with these new titles, endeavors to make hay while the sun shines.[34]Wollstonecraft was offended by the Jacobins' treatment of women. They refused to grant women equal rights, denounced 'Amazons', and made it clear that women were supposed to conform to Jean-Jacques Rousseau's ideal of helpers to men.[37] On 16 October 1793, Marie Antoinette was guillotined; among her charges and convictions, she was found guilty of committing incest with her son.[38] Though Wollstonecraft disliked the former queen, she was troubled that the Jacobins would make Marie Antoinette's alleged perverse sexual acts one of the central reasons for the French people to hate her.[37]As the daily arrests and executions of the Reign of Terror began, Wollstonecraft came under suspicion. She was, after all, a British citizen known to be a friend of leading Girondins. On 31 October 1793, most of the Girondin leaders were guillotined; when Imlay broke the news to Wollstonecraft, she fainted.[38] By this time, Imlay was taking advantage of the British blockade of France, which had caused shortages and worsened ever-growing inflation,[37] by chartering ships to bring food and soap from America and dodge the British Royal Navy, goods that he could sell at a premium to Frenchmen who still had money. Imlay's blockade-running gained the respect and support of some Jacobins, ensuring, as he had hoped, his freedom during the Terror.[39] To protect Wollstonecraft from arrest, Imlay made a false statement to the U.S. embassy in Paris that he had married her, automatically making her an American citizen.[40] Some of her friends were not so lucky; many, like Thomas Paine, were arrested, and some were even guillotined. Her sisters believed she had been imprisoned.Wollstonecraft called life under the Jacobins 'nightmarish'. There were gigantic daytime parades requiring everyone to show themselves and lustily cheer lest they be suspected of inadequate commitment to the republic, as well as nighttime police raids to arrest 'enemies of the republic'.[35] In a March 1794 letter to her sister Everina, Wollstonecraft wrote:It is impossible for you to have any idea of the impression the sad scenes I have been a witness to have left on my mind ... death and misery, in every shape of terrour, haunts this devoted country—I certainly am glad that I came to France, because I never could have had else a just opinion of the most extraordinary event that has ever been recorded.[35]Wollstonecraft soon became pregnant by Imlay, and on 14 May 1794 she gave birth to her first child, Fanny, naming her after perhaps her closest friend.[41] Wollstonecraft was overjoyed; she wrote to a friend, 'My little Girl begins to suck so MANFULLY that her father reckons saucily on her writing the second part of the R[igh]ts of Woman' (emphasis hers).[42] She continued to write avidly, despite not only her pregnancy and the burdens of being a new mother alone in a foreign country, but also the growing tumult of the French Revolution. While at Le Havre in northern France, she wrote a history of the early revolution, An Historical and Moral View of the French Revolution, which was published in London in December 1794.[43] Imlay, unhappy with the domestic-minded and maternal Wollstonecraft, eventually left her. He promised that he would return to her and Fanny at Le Havre, but his delays in writing to her and his long absences convinced Wollstonecraft that he had found another woman. Her letters to him are full of needy expostulations, which most critics explain as the expressions of a deeply depressed woman, while others say they resulted from her circumstances—a foreign woman alone with an infant in the middle of a revolution that had seen good friends imprisoned or executed.[44]The fall of the Jacobins and An Historical and Moral View of the French RevolutionIn July 1794, Wollstonecraft welcomed the fall of the Jacobins, predicting it would be followed with a restoration of freedom of the press in France, which led her to return to Paris.[35] In August 1794, Imlay departed for London and promised to return soon.[35] In 1793, the British government had begun a crackdown on radicals, suspending civil liberties, imposing drastic censorship, and trying for treason anyone suspected of sympathy with the revolution, which led Wollstonecraft to fear she would be imprisoned if she returned.[33]The winter of 1794–95 was the coldest winter in Europe for over a century, which reduced Wollstonecraft and her daughter Fanny to desperate circumstances.[45] The river Seine froze that winter, which made it impossible for ships to bring food and coal to Paris, leading to widespread starvation and deaths from the cold in the city.[46] Wollstonecraft continued to write to Imlay, asking him to return to France at once, declaring she still had faith in the revolution and did not wish to return to Britain.[33] After she left France on 7 April 1795, she continued to refer to herself as 'Mrs Imlay', even to her sisters, in order to bestow legitimacy upon her child.[47]The British historian Tom Furniss called An Historical and Moral View of the French Revolution the most neglected of Wollstonecraft's books. It was first published in London in 1794, but a second edition did not appear until 1989.[33] Later generations were more interested in her feminist writings than in her account of the French Revolution, which Furniss has called her 'best work'.[33] Wollstonecraft was not trained as a historian, but she used all sorts of journals, letters and documents recounting how ordinary people in France reacted to the revolution. She was trying to counteract what Furniss called the 'hysterical' anti-revolutionary mood in Britain, which depicted the revolution as due to the entire French nation's going mad.[33] Wollstonecraft argued instead that the revolution arose from a set of social, economic and political conditions that left no other way out of the crisis that gripped France in 1789.[33]An Historical and Moral View of the French Revolution was a difficult balancing act for Wollstonecraft. She condemned the Jacobin regime and the Reign of Terror, but at same time she argued that the revolution was a great achievement, which led her to stop her history in late 1789 rather than write about the Terror of 1793–94.[48] Edmund Burke had ended his Reflections on the Revolution in France with reference to the events of 5–6 October 1789, when a group of women from Paris forced the French royal family from the Palace of Versailles to Paris.[49] Burke called the women 'furies from hell', while Wollstonecraft defended them as ordinary housewives angry about the lack of bread to feed their families.[33] Against Burke's idealised portrait of Marie Antoinette as a noble victim of a mob, Wollstonecraft portrayed the queen as a femme fatale, a seductive, scheming and dangerous woman.[50] Wollstonecraft argued that the values of the aristocracy corrupted women in a monarchy because women's main purpose in such a society was to bear sons to continue a dynasty, which essentially reduced a woman's value to only her womb.[50] Moreover, Wollstonecraft pointed out that unless a queen was a queen regnant, most queens were queen consorts, which meant a woman had to exercise influence via her husband or son, encouraging her to become more and more manipulative. Wollstonecraft argued that aristocratic values, by emphasising a woman's body and her ability to be charming over her mind and character, had encouraged women like Marie Antoinette to be manipulative and ruthless, making the queen into a corrupted and corrupting product of the ancien régime.[50]England and William GodwinSeeking Imlay, Wollstonecraft returned to London in April 1795, but he rejected her. In May 1795 she attempted to commit suicide, probably with laudanum, but Imlay saved her life (although it is unclear how).[51] In a last attempt to win back Imlay, she embarked upon some business negotiations for him in Scandinavia, trying to recoup some of his losses. Wollstonecraft undertook this hazardous trip with only her young daughter and a maid. She recounted her travels and thoughts in letters to Imlay, many of which were eventually published as Letters Written During a Short Residence in Sweden, Norway, and Denmark in 1796.[52] When she returned to England and came to the full realization that her relationship with Imlay was over, she attempted suicide for the second time, leaving a note for Imlay:Let my wrongs sleep with me! Soon, very soon, shall I be at peace. When you receive this, my burning head will be cold ... I shall plunge into the Thames where there is the least chance of my being snatched from the death I seek. God bless you! May you never know by experience what you have made me endure. Should your sensibility ever awake, remorse will find its way to your heart; and, in the midst of business and sensual pleasure, I shall appear before you, the victim of your deviation from rectitude.[53]James Northcote, William Godwin,oil on canvas, 1802, the National Portrait GalleryShe then went out on a rainy night and "to make her clothes heavy with water, she walked up and down about half an hour" before jumping into the River Thames, but a stranger saw her jump and rescued her.[54] Wollstonecraft considered her suicide attempt deeply rational, writing after her rescue, I have only to lament, that, when the bitterness of death was past, I was inhumanly brought back to life and misery. But a fixed determination is not to be baffled by disappointment; nor will I allow that to be a frantic attempt, which was one of the calmest acts of reason. In this respect, I am only accountable to myself. Did I care for what is termed reputation, it is by other circumstances that I should be dishonoured.[55]Gradually, Wollstonecraft returned to her literary life, becoming involved with Joseph Johnson's circle again, in particular with Mary Hays, Elizabeth Inchbald, and Sarah Siddons through William Godwin. Godwin and Wollstonecraft's unique courtship began slowly, but it eventually became a passionate love affair.[56] Godwin had read her Letters Written in Sweden, Norway, and Denmark and later wrote that "If ever there was a book calculated to make a man in love with its author, this appears to me to be the book. She speaks of her sorrows, in a way that fills us with melancholy, and dissolves us in tenderness, at the same time that she displays a genius which commands all our admiration."[57] Once Wollstonecraft became pregnant, they decided to marry so that their child would be legitimate. Their marriage revealed the fact that Wollstonecraft had never been married to Imlay, and as a result she and Godwin lost many friends. Godwin received further criticism because he had advocated the abolition of marriage in his philosophical treatise Political Justice.[58]After their marriage on 29 March 1797, Godwin and Wollstonecraft moved to 29 The Polygon, Somers Town. Godwin rented an apartment 20 doors away at 17 Evesham Buildings in Chalton Street as a study, so that they could both still retain their independence; they often communicated by letter.[59][60] By all accounts, theirs was a happy and stable, though brief, relationship.[61]Birth of Mary, deathTitle page for Godwin's Memoirs of the Author of A Vindication of the Rights of Woman (1798)On 30 August 1797, Wollstonecraft gave birth to her second daughter, Mary. Although the delivery seemed to go well initially, the placenta broke apart during the birth and became infected; childbed fever was a common and often fatal occurrence in the eighteenth century.[62] After several days of agony, Wollstonecraft died of septicaemia on 10 September.[63] Godwin was devastated: he wrote to his friend Thomas Holcroft, "I firmly believe there does not exist her equal in the world. I know from experience we were formed to make each other happy. I have not the least expectation that I can now ever know happiness again."[64] She was buried at Old Saint Pancras Churchyard, where her tombstone reads, "Mary Wollstonecraft Godwin, Author of A Vindication of the Rights of Woman: Born 27 April 1759: Died 10 September 1797."[65]Posthumous, Godwin's MemoirsIn January 1798 Godwin published his Memoirs of the Author of A Vindication of the Rights of Woman. Although Godwin felt that he was portraying his wife with love, compassion, and sincerity, many readers were shocked that he would reveal Wollstonecraft's illegitimate children, love affairs, and suicide attempts.[66] The Romantic poet Robert Southey accused him of "the want of all feeling in stripping his dead wife naked" and vicious satires such as The Unsex'd Females were published.[67] Godwin's Memoirs portrays Wollstonecraft as a woman deeply invested in feeling who was balanced by his reason and as more of a religious sceptic than her own writings suggest.[68]Godwin's views of Wollstonecraft were perpetuated throughout the nineteenth century and resulted in poems such as "Wollstonecraft and Fuseli" by British poet Robert Browning and that by William Roscoe which includes the lines:[69]Hard was thy fate in all the scenes of lifeAs daughter, sister, mother, friend, and wife;But harder still, thy fate in death we own,Thus mourn'd by Godwin with a heart of stone.In 1851, Wollstonecraft's remains were moved by her grandson Percy Florence Shelley to his family tomb in St Peter's Church, Bournemouth.[70] Her monument in the churchyard lies to the north-east of the church just north of Sir John Soane's grave. Her husband was buried with her on his death in 1836, as was his second wife, Mary Jane Godwin (1766–1841).LegacyWollstonecraft has what scholar Cora Kaplan labelled in 2002 a "curious" legacy that has evolved over time: "for an author-activist adept in many genres ... up until the last quarter-century Wollstonecraft's life has been read much more closely than her writing".[72] After the devastating effect of Godwin's Memoirs, Wollstonecraft's reputation lay in tatters for nearly a century; she was pilloried by such writers as Maria Edgeworth, who patterned the "freakish" Harriet Freke in Belinda (1801) after her. Other novelists such as Mary Hays, Charlotte Turner Smith, Fanny Burney, and Jane West created similar figures, all to teach a "moral lesson" to their readers.[73] (Hays had been a close friend, and helped nurse her in her dying days.)[74]In contrast, there was one writer of the generation after Wollstonecraft who apparently did not share the judgmental views of her contemporaries. Jane Austen never mentioned the earlier woman by name, but several of her novels contain positive allusions to Wollstonecraft's work.[75] The American literary scholar Anne K. Mellor notes several examples. In Pride and Prejudice, Mr Wickham seems to be based upon the sort of man Wollstonecraft claimed that standing armies produce, while the sarcastic remarks of protagonist Elizabeth Bennet about "female accomplishments" closely echo Wollstonecraft's condemnation of these activities. The balance a woman must strike between feelings and reason in Sense and Sensibility follows what Wollstonecraft recommended in her novel Mary, while the moral equivalence Austen drew in Mansfield Park between slavery and the treatment of women in society back home tracks one of Wollstonecraft's favorite arguments. In Persuasion, Austen's characterization of Anne Eliot (as well as her late mother before her) as better qualified than her father to manage the family estate also echoes a Wollstonecraft thesis.[75]Scholar Virginia Sapiro states that few read Wollstonecraft's works during the nineteenth century as "her attackers implied or stated that no self-respecting woman would read her work".[76] (Still, as Craciun points out, new editions of Rights of Woman appeared in the UK in the 1840s and in the US in the 1830s, 1840s, and 1850s.[77]) If readers were few, then many were inspired; one such reader was Elizabeth Barrett Browning, who read Rights of Woman at age 12 and whose poem Aurora Leigh reflected Wollstonecraft's unwavering focus on education.[78] Lucretia Mott,[79] a Quaker minister, and Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Americans who met in 1840 at the World Anti-Slavery Convention in London, discovered they both had read Wollstonecraft, and they agreed upon the need for (what became) the Seneca Falls Convention,[80] an influential women's rights meeting held in 1848. Another woman who read Wollstonecraft was George Eliot, a prolific writer of reviews, articles, novels, and translations. In 1855, she devoted an essay to the roles and rights of women, comparing Wollstonecraft and Margaret Fuller. Fuller was an American journalist, critic, and women's rights activist who, like Wollstonecraft, had travelled to the Continent and had been involved in the struggle for reform (in this case the Roman Republic)—and she had a child by a man without marrying him.[81] Wollstonecraft's children's tales were adapted by Charlotte Mary Yonge in 1870.[82]Wollstonecraft's work was exhumed with the rise of the movement to give women a political voice. First was an attempt at rehabilitation in 1879 with the publication of Wollstonecraft's Letters to Imlay, with prefatory memoir by Charles Kegan Paul.[83] Then followed the first full-length biography,[77] which was by Elizabeth Robins Pennell; it appeared in 1884 as part of a series by the Roberts Brothers on famous women.[74] Millicent Garrett Fawcett, a suffragist and later president of the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies, wrote the introduction to the centenary edition (i.e. 1892) of the Rights of Woman; it cleansed the memory of Wollstonecraft and claimed her as the foremother of the struggle for the vote.[84] By 1898, Wollstonecraft was the subject of a first doctoral thesis and its resulting book.[85]With the advent of the modern feminist movement, women as politically dissimilar from each other as Virginia Woolf and Emma Goldmanembraced Wollstonecraft's life story.[86] By 1929 Woolf described Wollstonecraft—her writing, arguments, and "experiments in living"—as immortal: "she is alive and active, she argues and experiments, we hear her voice and trace her influence even now among the living".[87] Others, however, continued to decry Wollstonecraft's lifestyle.[88] A biography published in 1932 refers to recent reprints of her works, incorporating new research, and to a "study" in 1911, a play in 1922, and another biography in 1924.[89] Interest in her never completely died, with full-length biographies in 1937[90] and 1951.[91]With the emergence of feminist criticism in academia in the 1960s and 1970s, Wollstonecraft's works returned to prominence. Their fortunes reflected that of the second wave of the North American feminist movement itself; for example, in the early 1970s, six major biographies of Wollstonecraft were published that presented her "passionate life in apposition to [her] radical and rationalist agenda".[92] The feminist artwork The Dinner Party, first exhibited in 1979, features a place setting for Wollstonecraft.[93][94] In the 1980s and 1990s, yet another image of Wollstonecraft emerged, one which described her as much more a creature of her time; scholars such as Claudia Johnson, Gary Kelly, and Virginia Sapiro demonstrated the continuity between Wollstonecraft's thought and other important eighteenth-century ideas regarding topics such as sensibility, economics, and political theory.Wollstonecraft's work has also had an effect on feminism outside the academy in recent years. Ayaan Hirsi Ali, a political writer and former Muslim who is critical of Islam in general and its dictates regarding women in particular, cited the Rights of Woman in her autobiography Infidel and wrote that she was "inspired by Mary Wollstonecraft, the pioneering feminist thinker who told women they had the same ability to reason as men did and deserved the same rights".[95] British writer Caitlin Moran, author of the best-selling How to Be a Woman, described herself as "half Wollstonecraft" to the New Yorker.[96] She has also inspired more widely. Nobel Laureate Amartya Sen, the Indian economist and philosopher who first identified the missing women of Asia, draws repeatedly on Wollstonecraft as a political philosopher in The Idea of Justice.[97]Several plaques have been erected to honour Wollstonecraft.[98][99][100] A ten-year long campaign to raise money for a commemorative statue, to be sited opposite the Newington Green Unitarian Church she attended, reached its funding target in 2019.[101] The sculptor Maggi Hambling was commissioned to create the work[102][103] which is due to be unveiled on 10 November 2020.[104]Wollstonecraft is often regarded as one of the founding figures of feminist theory, and rightly so. Her major work is A Vindication of the Rights of Woman, which was a reference to a famous work called “Vindication of the Rights of Man.” That work was thought of as a universal claim, but like many similar statements, it ignored the situation of women and assimilated them as extension of men. This kind of contradiction is what she set out to expose: the tendency, even at the level of philosophy purporting to elaborate universal theories of human virtues, to consider the virtue of women to consist in serving and supporting the desires of men. The book stands as one of the great attacks on the pernicious effects of patriarchy – that is, a way of organizing society in which the desires of men dominate and determine the desires of women. What this means and what its effects on both men and women is one of our main topics.Wollstonecraft is not only a critic of patriarchy, however. Her book is also an attempt to articulate a radically different way of conceiving the relations between men and women. The key, she argued, was not so much equality, it is virtue. It is not enough to ensure that men and women both “get the same amount” out of their relationships. Just as, maybe more, important she argued is to rethink the very nature of marriage, so that it isn’t conceived as only something “we get something out of.”   What that means, and its far reaching consequences beyond the domain of the family, is our other main topic.We’ll work though some key aspects of these ideas in more detail, and put her into dialogue with Marx and Smith to do so. We’ll more through three main themes.4. Theory of sexual alienation5. Theory of non-domination6. Marriage as virtue vs. utilityTheory of sexual alienationW did not really articulate her ideas about gender in terms of alienation. But in the light of having just studied Marx, I think it can be very helpful to put them into a dialogue on this topic and some interesting secondary literature on W has argued that the core of her idea is in fact a theory of alienation. What does that mean?Start by recalling what motivated Marx’s theory of alienation. Remember: Marx notice that a major social effect of industrialization was the split between the household and the workplace. DRAW HOUSE AND FACTORY. This split has been fateful and in many ways traumatic. That was the key to Marx’s theory of alienation. In his view, humans are fundamentally workers, remember. That means the workplace is where we are our truest selves. Not the family/household: that is where we maintain ourselves as organic, animal-type beings. We eat, sleep, and reproduce our bodies. But we make objects that express our creative intellect in the workplace. The workplace however, though it could and should be a place of freedom, in reality had become a place of domination and alienation. Thus when workers go to work, where they should be free to express themselves in the most complete way according to their essence, they are, Marx argued, unfree, dominated, controlled; when they come to the household, at nights and weekend, that is when they feel most themselves, most recognized, most able to realize their truest and most authentic desires.  Note in the sentences I just said, I purposely used the gender neutral “they.” But this was obviously a distortion. The workers Marx was talking about were all men [DRAW A MALE SYMBOL IN THE FACTORY.} And when they went home after work, they felt their desire could be realized because…in the household they were like the factory boss.  What they wanted and felt and desired determined what happened there, and the virtue of women was understood to consist in making the lives of men as enjoyable as possible. No wonder workers felt at home in the household rather than factory! In the factory they were subject to the whims of the boss. At home, they had somebody whose entire education was geared toward pleasing him, making his life agreeable and easy. The subjugation of women in the household is in many ways the flip side of the subjugation of men in the workplace. You can see this through another comparison to Marx. Remember how Marx described how the relationship between owner and worker changes when they move from the market into the workplace? They meet in the market ,and have a “free” negotiation about wages. They then agree, seemingly as equals, coming to an agreement. But then they go into the factory…and the owner smiles since he knows that here, his word is the law. The traditional patriarchal marriage is like that. Men and women might court in a “free” way. They make a deal, each bringing something to the table, and get married. Then they leave the light of the wedding and the dating and the courtship, and enter into the household. And the man smiles: here his word is law.So this is an interesting symmetry, and suggests that we can continue the parallel further, and gain some insight into how this structural change. I’m going to try to suggest that in W we can find a very interesting theory to the effect that the emergence of households and workplaces as distinct social spaces creates not only the alienation of labor from its realization as creative workers,  but also the alienation of men and women from their fullest potential as loving wives and husbands  (what that potential is will be something we need to articulate). Let’s try it out. Remember, the theory of alienation we articulated before identified 4 dimensiosn of alienation, 4 ways in which work in a capitalist setting made workers “strangers” or “other” to themselves. Let’s try to apply that 4-fold schema to the domain of the family.1. Alienation from yourself: consider this quotation from J.J. Rousseau, one of the great enlightenment thinkers, famous for articulating a universalist theory of human equality:“the education of women should always be relative to the men. To please, to be useful to us…to render our lives easy and agreeable: these are the duties of women at all times, and what they should be taught in their infancy.”Rousseau was a major target of Wollstonecraft’s criticism, and this quote captures this dimension of alienation. In the patriarchial household, the woman’s greatest realization of her own self is defined by making herself subservient to the self of the man. This is alienation in a pure form: the form of the relationship in this kind of household forces her to be other than herself. There is no room in that conception for her to cultivate the full scope of her abilities, many of which would involve her outside of the house, as a citizen, or a worker, or in many other ways. That’s alienation: to be herself she has to deny herself.W goes further, though. The patriarchal family clearly alienations women from themselves. It also alienates men from themselves! Why? In the patriarchal family, the desire of the men is authoritative automatically. In the end, there is no questioning it. That means its acceptance depends NOT on reason, persuasion, but on force and power. This menas that women just are expected to accept what he says. The result is that men never know for sure if their opinions are being accepted because they are reasonable, or just because women have to accept them. p. 41It is impossible for any man, when the most favourable circumstances concur, to acquire sufficient knowledge and strength of mind to discharge the duties of a king, entrusted with uncontrolled power; how then must they be violated when his very elevation is an insuperable bar to the attainment of either wisdom or virtue; when all the feelings of a man are stifled by flat- tery, and reflection shut out by pleasure! S It is as if they are surrounded by “yes women.” Compare to George Lucas. If you only have people saying “yes Episode 1 is great, Jar Jar Binks is genius” you never are forced to grapple with yourself. If you always get what you want, you never find out who you are. This is another way that the patriarchical family produces self-alienation: it harms men by depriving them of the chance to see themselves as others truly see them.2. Alienation from fellows. The patriarchal family also alienates women from one another.  As we just discussed, when one side of a relationship is defined as dominant, so that their desires are supposed to be automatically accepted, the subordinanted one will be forced to ingratiate themselves to that dominant. In other words, they have to flatter. This is the origin of the notion of “women’s virtues” as being cunning, manipulative, able to wrap people around their little fingers, and so on. p. 45:will run with destructive fury when there are no barriers to break its force. Women are told from their infancy, and taught by the example of their mothers, that a little knowledge of human weakness, justly termed cunning, softness of temper, outward obedience, and a scrupulous attention to a puerile kind of propriety, will obtain for them the protection of man; and should they be beautiful, every thing else is needless, for, at least, twenty years of their lives. p. 33Women are, in fact, so much degraded by mistaken notions of female excellence, that I do not mean to add a paradox when I assert, that this artificial weakness produces a propensity to tyrannize, and gives birth to cunning, the natural opponent of strength, which leads them to play off those contemptible infantine airs that undermine esteem even whilst they excite desire. Let men beco One of W’s key points is that this notion of “feminine virtue” is an outcome of this social situation, it is not somehow essential to women. She makes this point through what would have been a very provocative comparison: to soldiers. p. 50. Standing armies can never consist of resolute, robust men; they may be well disciplined machines, but they will seldom contain men under the influence of strong passions, or with very vigorous faculties. And as for any depth of understanding, I will venture to affirm, that it is as rarely to be found in the army as amongst women; and the cause, I maintain, is the same. It may be further observed, that officers are also particularly at- tentive to their persons, fond of dancing, crowded rooms, adventures, and ridicule.* Like the fair sex, the business of their lives is gallantry.—They were taught to please, and they only live to please. Yet they do not lose their rank in the distinction of sexes, for they are still reckoned superior to women, though in what their superiority consists, beyond what I have just mentioned, it is difficult to discover. The great misfortune is this, that they both acquire manners before mor- als, and a knowledge of life before they have, from reflection, any acquain- tance with the grand ideal outline of human nature. The point here is that the soldier, preening over his looks, figuring out how to suck up and manipulate his superior – he is also an example of “feminine virtues.” It is a socioloigical not a natural fact.Now, what does this have to do with alienation from fellows? In the case of women, it means the pinnacle of their achievement is getting a husband, and then controlling and manipulating him. This puts women at odds with one another. W gives the example of wives and sisters:From Nancy Kendrick:In the following passage she paints a clear picture of the way role virtues create a barrier to female friendship: p. 92Girls who have been weakly educated, are often left cruelly by their parents without any provision . . . and are dependent on the bounty of their brothers. . . . These brothers . . . give as a favour, what children of the same parents had an equal right to. In this . . . humiliating situation, a docile female may remain some time. . . . But when the brother marries . . . she is viewed with averted looks as an intruder, an unnecessary burden on the benevolence of the master of the house, and his new partner. . . . The wife, a cold-hearted, narrow-minded woman, and this is not an unfair supposition; for the present mode of education does not tend to enlarge the heart any more than the understanding, is jealous of the little kindness which her husband shews to his relations; and her sensibility not rising to humanity, she is displeased at seeing the property of her children lavished on a helpless sister....The consequence is obvious, the wife has recourse to cunning to undermine the habitual affection, which she is afraid openly to oppose; and neither tears nor caresses are spared till the spy is worked out of her home, and thrown on the world . . . with a small stipend and an uncultivated mind, into a joyless solitude.63 Kendrick:There are two important points to note here: first, in none of these relations does one find the necessary condition for any friendship—reciprocated goodwill—or the necessary condition for virtue friendship—praiseworthy character traits. The sister is the recipient of the brother’s charity, not of his esteem. All she can offer him in return is a demeaned gratitude. Between the sisters-in-law, there are no virtues; there is only the passive docility of one and the cunning selfishness of the other. The second point is that Wollstonecraft is suggesting that marriage is a corrupt institution precisely because it creates women who not only fail to cultivate the moral virtues, but who, in fact, cultivate the moral vices. She continues: These two women may be much upon a par, with respect to reason and humanity; and changing situations, might have acted just the same selfish part; but had they been differently educated, the case would also have been very different. The wife would not . . . wish to love [her husband] merely because he loved her, but on account of his virtues.64 Wollstonecraft is pointing out that when marriage is conceived of and practiced as a friendship of utility, women are interchangeable placeholders. In one situ- ation a woman is a sister, in another she is a wife, and the more competently a woman fulfills her role, the more she either weakens her virtues (through passive docility) or strengthens her vices (through jealousy and cruelty). Thus, female bonds appear impossible. The more general point is that the notion of “sisterhood” or a fellowship of women with one another is very difficult to develop, since women are in competition for the favors of men, and so are always having to outwit and manipulate one another. 3. Alienation from product. Remember this in Marx. The idea was that the product of your work, the fruit of your labor, should, could, be the realization of your life. But if you make it in a capitalist setting, you have no special relationship to it, since it belongs to the owner.Is there a way that W sees this kind of logic is at work in patriarchical and not only capitalist relations? Here again the issue is that when women’s value and meaning in life is defined by sustaining the desire of men, they spend their childhood, as she writes, “in acquiring a smattering of accomplishments; meanwhile strength of body and mind are sacrificed to libertine notions of beauty, to the desire of es- tablishing themselves,—the only way women can rise in the world,—by marriage. And this desire making mere animals of them, when they marry they act as such children may be expected to act:—they dress; they paint, and nickname God’s creatures.—”Basically, she is saying that women’s education infantilized them – they themselves were forced to be childlike. The result is that they lack the kind of judgment and maturity necessary to raise children. As she writes:Can they be expected to govern a family with judgment, or take care of the poor babes whom they bring into the world?In other words, the reduction of women to “their animal” features of flattery (rmemeber Smith – flattery is a way that animals can get others to do things for them, humans can do it through reasoning and negotiating and persuading, and W had studied Smith, critically) means their capacity to execise the maturity and judgment necessary to raise a child is harmed. So what could be the great product of marriage, the realiation of the union of man and woman, the child, becomes the opposite – it becomes a reminder of how degraded she has become. W even suggests this leads some women to prefer “ ne- glect her children to practise the arts of coquetry.” This is to say, that she would rather go out and flirt and dance and party than take care of her kids. This is another form of alienation diagnosed by W: the way in which patriarchy alienates women from their own children.4. Alienation from humanity. This is last component of alienation, and in a way the deepest source of W’s concern. Simply speaking, by confining the ambitiosn and scope of women’s experience to pleasing men, whole parts of her personality are not allowed to develop. Here again is her scathing critique of Rousseau:P .52Rousseau declares that a woman should never, for a moment, feel herself independent, that she should be governed by fear to exercise her natural cunning, and made a coquetish slave in order to render her a more alluring object of desire, a sweeter companion to man, whenever he chooses to relax himself. He carries the arguments, which he pretends to draw from the indications of nature, still further, and insinu- ates that truth and fortitude, the corner stones of all human virtue, should be cultivated with certain restrictions, because, with respect to the female character, obedience is the grand lesson which ought to be impressed with unrelenting rigour. See again the consequences: since women are not to be independent, she is not supposed to develop the major virtues of independence: truth, seeing things with your own eyes, fortitude or courage, the ability to face up to problems on your own. These are involved in the household, but they go beyond the household, into the public sphere: into the world of politics, civil society, workplaces, religion, militaries – all those areas where women were not permitted to be. The denial is a kind of inequality, but the deeper reason why inequality matters is that it denies women the capacity for independence and the cultivation of all aspects of their possible virtues. The problem is being made dependent on the will of another, fundamentally – all those areas are areas of freedom, leadership, responsibility, decision-making. And since freedom and independence are the cornerstone as she says of all virtue, patriarchy in the end is a denial of humanity. Theory of non-dominationSo far we’ve seen the critical thrust of Wollstonecraft’s ideas. She is proposing what we could call a theory of sexual alienation, in which the structuring principle of the household places men and women at odds with themselves, one another, the products of their sexual union, and their fullest humanity. This, like Marx’s theory of alienation, is a sociological theory, even though the concept of sociology didn’t exist at the time. The reason is that it locates the source of the psychological experience of alienation in the social structure in which it is embedded – in Marx’s case the capitalist workplace, in Wollstonecraft’s case, the patriarchical household. It isn’t fundamentally that men are “bad” and women are “good” in W’s view; it is that they are placed in a social structure that makes it impossible, or at any rate very difficult, to realize themselves in the ways that they could – and should.But that raises our next question. The entire theory of alienation revolves around the concept of domination.  If you think back to each dimension of alienation we just worked through, they all turned on the implications of one persons’s desire and will dominating the desire and will of the other. This in turn implies that the flip-side – non-domination – must in some way be the ideal state. If domination is the problem, non-domination must be the solution. So therefore if we want to be more than critics, we need to think through what kind of a state our criticism is working towards. This is a general principle: critical social theory can’t stop with only pointing out problems; it also needs to give us some idea of what we are working towards. Now, the ultimate answer to that from Wollestonecraft will be: friendship. The ideal relationship is friendship, and the problem she diagnoses amounts to ways in which social arrangments make that ideal near impossible to achieve. But to get there and understand that, we need to first spend some time thinking about domination and non-domination.The ideal of non-domination is central to a tradition of thought that Wollstoncraft grew out of, called republicanism. This isn’t the Republic party in the contemporary USA. Rather, it is a tradition of social and political theory which says that the ideal social order is based on the notion of freedom, democracy, and a vigorous public sphere where citizens debate with one another about the best way to live. W’s signal contribution to this tradition was to work out its implications for women, making a powerful case that there is no good reason to restrict the enjoyment of those ideals to men.It is worth reflecting a bit on what we mean by “domination” and why we consider it be some kind of insult to a person’s freedom and dignity. What does domination mean? It is when the will, desires, choices of one person are determined by another. What is wrong with that? Compare it to nature: nature prevents me from growing wings and flying. It determines in some ways my desires and choices. Is that an offense to my freedom and dignity? It feels different than if a person is dominating me? Why? There is a long tradition grappling with this, which in many ways goes back to the philosopher GWF Hegel runs through thinkers like Fanon, and on to folks we’ll read next term like WEB Dubois and GH Mead. The key insight this tradition developed has to do with the concept of RECOGNITION. To be a fully free person, it isn’t enough to just get what you want. It also requires that you be ACKNOWLEDGED by others as in some way responsible for your own choices and decisions. To be fully free in some way requires being seen by others as free, this tradition argued. That means freedom is not only an individual phebnomenon, it is also a social fact, since it depends not just on what I do as an individual, but how I am recognized and treated by others. Now, we could do a whole course on this concept, but the point for now is that this linkage between domination, freedom, and how people treat or recognize one another is at stake in everything W is tryinto to say. But this is not an abstract question. It is very concrete: what does it mean for a wife to enjoy freedom in relation to her husband? If a free person is somebody who no other person dominates by sheer authority, what does it mean for a marriage to be free in that sense? Let’s try to make it more concrete with an example. Let’s imagine a husband and wife of W’s day. The husband would have great power of the wife. He actually might have had the legal right to determine what she wears, who she meets, household finance decisions, what she can buy. This kind of hting actually isn’t that far in the past: it was only in 1964 that women were legally allowed to open a bank account without their husband’s permission in Canada. Women could not be on juries in Quebec until 1971. Until 1978 flight attendants weren’t allowed to work after they got married, or were older than 32. So this is not the distant past.Still, let’s imagine that in this marriage we are imagining, the husband is a good husband. He loves his wife, totally, and worships the ground she walks on. She can wear whatever she chooses, meet whoever she wants, eat whatever she wants, without needing to ask his permission at all. Within the range of what is legally permissible, no one is preventing her from choosing anything she wants. No one manipulates her or tricks her. So here’s the question: is she free?Well, the answer to that question depends on the theory of freedom we have. 1. Theory 1: freedom consists in being able to choose what you want. You have some preferences, and as long as there is no door blocking you from getting them, you are free. You could also think of it as freedom as non-frustration. It doesn’t mean that every option in the world is open to you,just that whatever you actually end up choosing to do isn’t blocked when you choose it.This notion of freedom has a long history. You can find it in the great political philosopher Thomas Hobbes, as well as in many contemporary economists. So, here’s our question: on theory 1, theory as non-frustration, is the wife in our example free? Yes, she is. Her husband doesn’t deny her anything. Whatever she wants, she gets. Now let’s consider Theory 2:2. Theory 2: freedom as non-interference. How does this differ from non-frustration? Imagine you are in prison. So there’s lots of things you can’t do. There are walls everywhere. But now lets’s say you say to yourself: ok, as long as I’m stuck here, I’m going to figure out some things I can actually do. You read a lot, study, exercise, and so on. You really improve yourself in a lot of ways. You are healthier and smarter! Maybe you decide you actually like being in prison.Are you free? In theory #1, you would be! Your desires are not frustrated. All you want to do is read and exercise, and there you go, you aren’t frustrated. But that’s absurd: you are in jail! The problem with theory 1 is that it says: if we just adapt our psychology to an oppressive situation, then we are free. But if the problem is the situation, then even if you learn to live with it, then you still aren’t free.So theory 2 instead proposes that you are free not just by being able to satisfy whatever desires you have, but by being free to satisfy any (legitimate) desire you might have. So if you started to want to take a long hike in the hills outside the prison, you’d be free if you weren’t interfered with. Even if you don’t want that right now, the fact that you might, and that if you did you’d be blocked – that means you aren’t free.Now again: is the wife in our example free on theory 2? Yes, she is free. It isn’t just that her loving husband doesn’t block her from doing whatever she likes. He would not interfere with anything she might eventually want, whatever she happens to choose. He loves her after all! He gives her both non-frustration and non-interference.But of course the wife in the example isn’t free. At any moment, if he wanted to, the husband could prevent her from doing what she wants. This is an example of the importance of social theory. Theory 1 and Theory 2 seem very intuitive. If I proposed them to you, and said “is the person who can get whatever they want free?”, you probably would agree. BUT if that theory is true, then many real relationships we consider to be unfree, like the one in the example, would count as free. This is why theory matters so much. A bad theory makes it hard to see what is in front of our faces; we can’t change the world unless we can see it as it really is. Theory allows us to do that.So we need a different theory of freedom. This is the type of theory W is advocating, in all the ways she shows how women are unfree in virtue NOT of being unable to get what they want. Rather, she emphasizes the domination of one person by another. So we have a hint at:3. Theory 3: freedom as non-domination. In this theory, it isn’t so much about you getting what you want, at least it isn’t only that. It is about whether another person determines your ability to make choices. If we think about it in terms of opening doors the way we have: the question is whether there is a door-keeper there who can arbitrarily, for whatever eason they want, keep you from getting through. It isn’t just enough that you CAN say what you think, there must not be somebody there who you depend on to allow you to say what you think. Even if I always get what I want, if you could tell me what I want, and I have no recourse, then even if I get what I want, you control my wishes. So, on this theory, is the wife in the example free?No, clearly not. IN the end, even though she has wide latitude to pursue whatever she likes in her life, she does that in virtue of permission granted to her by the husband. She is not in the end in control of her own life, however nice and loving the husband is. He is the master of her life and she lives under her will. Everything we see in W’s critique flows from this situation. It makes women servants to men, and induces them to all the forms of degradation she articulates – the urge to flatter, cajole, manipulate, impress by looks, gear your life towards making men happy, it all flows from that. As she says, as long as women remain absolutely dependent on their husbands, women will be “cunning, mean, and selfish” – again not because of anyting having to do with the “natural” qualities of women, but because of the degrading qualities of this type of social structure. Marriage as friendshipAnd this takes us to our last topic in Wollstonecraft. If we recognize that the freedom of women depends on reconfiguring the relationships between men and women on the ideal of non-domination (and not only non-frustration or non-interference) what does that mean? Now, a part of that story has to do with legal changes, and W was a major advocate of some of the legal protections that have since her time been enacted in many societies. Basically, these include laws that guard women against the personal domination of husbands, such as no-fault divorces, independence in financial and other choices, the right to work, vote, attain an education in any subject you like, and so forth. These are all familiar to us now, but it is helpful to remind ourselves how radical they were not too long ago. We are still working out their implications today.  Beyond the legal changes, however, is a maybe deeper change in the very conception of how many and women are supposed to relate. We can sum this up as a transformation of the ideal of marriage into friendship, or rather a specific type of friendship, called virtue friendship. Let’s articulate that idea.There is a long tradition of thought about the nature of friendship, since friendship is clearly one of the most important features of human life. When you ask anybody “what si the most important thing in your life,” they will almost always say “family and friends.” So sociological theory needs to have a theory of friendship, and Wollstonecraft is one of the great thinkers in this tradition.It goes back to an ancient Greek philosopher, Aristotle. Aristotle wrote that friendship is “an absolute necessity in human life” and that nobody would choose a life without friends, even if you had all the other good things in life. He’s right, isn’t he? But why??!!The answer has to do with the good things that friendship brings to us. We can distinguish three types of goods that friendship brings:1. Utility. In a friendship based on utility, each friend seeks in the other what they lack or need. It doesn’t just mean material things, like a need a hammer, and you need a nail, so we become friends, but it does include those kind of business-type friendhsips rooted in “you scratch my back I’ll scratch yours.” Still, It more deeply means features of character. So if you are physically strong but not too smart, and I am smart but not too physically strong, it would benefit each of us to become friends. That is a friendship based in utility: we each bring something to the table that the other needs.2. Pleasure. In a friendship based on pleasure, each friend seeks in the other some type of pleasurable experience. Think of friends that you enjoy hanging out with, having some drinks or coffee, going to a party, sharing some laughs. Those are your “pleasure” friends – they aren’t like your “utility” friends who provide thigns you don’t have. Rather they are the friends that are just fun to be around, for the sake of having fun together. 3. Virtue. Notice that in the first two types of friendship, you aren’t friends with the person in themselves. You are friends because of something else they provide (such as laughs in the case of pleasure, or, say, a business contact in the case of utility). Your virtue friends are people you like in and of themselves, not for any other benefit they might provide. Your motivation in being friends is to support them in being the best person they can be, and at the same time they push you to be the best person you can be. Of course they can provide you pleasure and utility, but the friendship goes beyond that. Now that is the classical theory of friendship. What does that theory say about marriage between a man and a woman? What type of a friendship is that? Well, it said traditionally that marriage was a relationship of utility and pleasure. Men and women in marriage provide bring differnet things to the relationship, in this traditional view, and so they complement one another. This is the basis of the traditional notion of the “gendered division of labor”, i.e. that men do the hunting or earn money at work and women take care fo the family and children at home. They also can enjoy one another’s company, and get a lot of pleasure out of being married. Why can’t marriage be a virtue friendship in the traditional theory? There is some controvery here, but I’ll just boil down the main argument. It has to do with the difference between two concepts:Complementariness vs. reciprocity.Utility and pleasure friendships are defined by complentariness. Each brings something to the table the other needs. But virtue friendships are reciprocal, but not necessarly grounded in being complentary. Among virtue friends, they love each other for their own sakes, not for what they might need or lack. This kind of reciprocity involves two features:1. Partiality. You care about this particular person. They can’t be substituted for somebody else. Note that in the case of pleasure or utility the friend CAN be substituted. If we are business friends, and somebody else has better connections, see you later. If we are pleasure friends, and somebody else is more fun to hang out with, then that’s it, see you later. But in a virtue friendship, you aren’t substitutable. I care abot you specifically, your good, and vice versa.This links closely with the second elelment: 2. Selflessness. In utility and pleasure friendships, you are out to get something for yourself. In a virtue friendship, you give up yourself for the good of the other, and they give themselves up for your good. We call it unconditional love – my friendship for you isn’t conditional on what you can do for me.In the traditional theory, marriage can’t be a virtue friendship because men and women are understood to bring complmentary goods to the relationships. This isn’t only about, say, each family providng a utilitarian benefit like money or social status to the other, e.g. marrying for money or marrying into a more respectable family. It goes deeper, and is based on the idea that men and women possess fundamentally different types of chjarcters. In crude form, let’s say it is women are tender and men are tough. The idea then is that marriage is complenetary, since in it the tender and tough complement one another, and therefore complete one another. Though that sounds nice, “you complete me” can seem like a quite beautiful sentiment, the point is that it still isn’t a virtue friendship. That’s because it is grounded in lack or need: if I am tough, I can’t be tender without you, and if I am tender, I can’t be tough without you. So we aren’t friends/married for the sake of each other, but for the good things the other can provide that we need. One of the most profound aspects of W’s book is that it goes beyond social critique of the social conditions that block women from being fully free and independent. It provides more than that: a justification for reconceptualizing marriage as a virtue friendship.W shares much with the tradiiotnal conception of friendship. The key difference is that she rejects the proposition that the virtues are gendered. This happens in two key dimesnions.1. She rejects the notion, as we’ve seen, of “feminine” virtues. Because some of these aren’t actually virtues (like cunningness or duplicity, saying one thing and meaning another). And second, even if we thought these were worthy of praise, to be a virtue, she argued, requires beying grounded in reason. And these so called “feminine” virtues are not, rather they are grounded in tricking and manipulation, behind people’s backs so to speak. 2. The more profound reason she rjects the concept of gendered virtues is because “female” virtues she believes are defined as relative to their utility for men. But a true virtue is not relative like that, is about the essential growth of a person as a human being. Though of course we exist in relationships to others, there’s a difference between defining your essential virtue by giving men pleasure and satisfaction. Once we reject the idea of gendered virtues, then there are major consequences for how we conceive of marriage. One that W noted is that it implies that the non-patriarchical marriage is not fundamentally about equality. Notixce that you could have a utilitarian or pleasure-based marriage that is equal. Each gives as much as they get. That is equal, but it isn’t a virtue friendship grounded in intrinsic care for the other’s good. It is still based on utility, and is therefore substittub.e If I am looking for somebody who is smart funny and pretty, if I find somebody smarter funnier and prettier, then I need to leave my wife! But I won’t do that if I care about her and her in particular. So the virtue marriage is NOT TRANSACTIONAL.That’s part of what a virtue friendship is, and W’s radical reconceptualization of marriage is to argue that marriage in in highest form is and can be like a virtue friendship: each perfects the other rather tha complete the other. PERFECTION VS. COMPLETION. So again this comes closer today to how we conceive marriage in the ideal form, and W articulates the basis for this ideal in explaining why if we believe in the equality of men and women we are committed to the idea that marriage must be not redudec to utility or pleasure but it is also or more a relationship that could exemplify virtue. But to realize that possibility requires that women and men not be conceived as being restricted to only some kinds of virtues, some for men and some for women. If virtue marriage is possible, each must be allowed to develop every kind of virtue.The final point I want to make about W’s theory concerns its scope. She is like I said often referred to as one of the first feminist theorists, and we can see now why that is accurate. But she also shows why feminist thinking actually goes far beyond the narrow scope of marriage and the family, even though we have been talking about those issues a lot. We can see that if we return to the picture of the household and the workplace. Note that much of what W has exposed revolves around the effegs of the strict split between the two, where one is for men and the other is for women. If we accept W’s conclusions, that means that the division between the two, and the relationship between the two, needs to be rethought and reconfigured. If women and men are to be able to meet as equals in marriag,e they need to also be equals in the workplace. If they are to meet as equals in the workplace, they also need to be equals in the household. More than that, though, the very nature of households needs to change once they are conceive on a principle of non-domination, just as the nature of a workplace would have to change, just as the would the idea of how work and family relate to one another. Work would also have to incoropirate elements traditonallhy associated with family life, like care and empathy, and family life would have to incoprporate elements traditoijally associated with work, like autonomy and respect and compensation for effort. What that means – that’s a huge topic, and is many ways the pathway that feminist theory has continued to follow to this day. But W is one of the people who laid the ground for it and provide its intellectual basis.  