LECTURE SIX: MARX ON CRITICISM, IDEOLOGY, AND ALIENATION.1. Historical Context/Biography2. Ideology Critiquea. Ideologyb. Critique3. AlienationHISTORICAL CONTEXT/BIOGRAPHYMarx was born in 1818, and lived and worked in a time of intellectual ferment after the French revolution. We’ll spend a bit more time on Marx’s life.  This is because, though the other authors we have and will read were tremendously influential, Marx took on the qualities of a kind of prophet, gathering followers to him personally after he died, and becoming the inspiration for a movement which radically altered the course of every human being to live since 1917 and the Russian Revolution.  Many people may tell you that it is possible to separate a cool, analytical Marx from the prophetic version, but I do not think this is so.  Marx wanted to analyze and anatomize capitalist society, and he created many powerful concepts for doing so.  But you cannot understand his ideas, or his influence, without understanding their ability and ambition to effect change, and inspire mass movements of people.  Just like you miss something if you treat Jesus of Nazareth as a wise moral teacher – those words are meaningless if you don’t change your life in accordance with them; likewise, for Marx, his words are meaningless if WE don’t change our lives in accordance with them.  Understanding means living them, for him.His father was a prominent lawyer, and both his parents came from a long line of rabbis.  Though Marx’s parents were Jewish, his father was a child of the enlightenment, devoted to the works of secular philosophers rather than the Talmud.  Thus, when in 1817 Jews in their region were losing their civil rights, Marx’s father converted to liberal Protestantism, as he was vaguely deist, and did not consider religious conversion to be that morally significant.  Marx’s father introduced him to classical literature, as did an influential neighbor, with whom he read Homer, discussed Shakespeare, Don Quixote, and Saint-Simon (remember him!).  Marx did fine in school, and went off to study law at a relatively small university in Bonn.  Then he transferred to the University of Berlin, because that was where the action was.  In Berlin, he fell into radical circles, known as the Young Hegelians.  Hegel was the most important and famous philosopher in Germany probably from 1800-1820.  Everybody who was anybody had some opinion about Hegel.  For our purposes, we can think of Hegel as very similar to Comte – both were interested in how societies could be seen as becoming more rational, both emphasized the role of intellectual history and the Mind in shaping history, and both believed that social structures and ideas were highly dependent on specific historical conditions – that law, philosophy, masculinity, feminity, family structure, culture, art, property, economics, did not respond to eternal truths of human nature, but evolved and changed over time in systematic ways, that all of these were, in some sense, products of human activity, creations, rather than givens.  We don’t need to get into the details about what Hegel thought right now, but we can say that the Young Hegelians were interested in taking some of Hegel’s key ideas, but turning them into a revolutionary direction that Hegel would not himself have taken them.  They were all rather bohemian, radical, anti-religious.  And they were cool, hanging out in cafes and salons and bars.Marx graduated, but was too radical to get a job, and wasn’t trained for much beyond intellectual conversation.  He got lucky, and a friend asked him to write for a radical newspaper, and he wrote many articles about the bad working conditions of the poor.  He wrote a critical article about some Russian activities, and the Russian authorities pressured the German authorities to shut down the paper, so they did.  Then he got married, and moved to Paris in 1843, since Germany was too reactionary and authoritarian for him to find a position.  Paris was really the center of the intellectual universe at the time, as well as for political and artistic activity.  Studied revolutionary ideas of people like Fourier and Saint-Simon (didn’t read Comte until later), as well as political economists like Adam Smith and Ricardo.  He also met some of the key players in the radical scene.  Bakunin from Russia, Proudohn, both anarchists (What is Property? Property is Theft!).  But most importantly, he met Engels, with whom he collaborated for the rest of his life.  Engels was the son of a textile manufacturer, and he knew the ins and outs of how actual factories worked, and through him met many of the artisans and craftsma radicals with whom the intellectuals were trying to organize.  It was in this heady environment, in which early everybody believed that some sort of massive revolution was immanent (it had happened once, after all!), that he wrote the texts we’re reading for today.In 1845, Marx, with many other radicals, were expelled from Paris.  He went to Belgium for a bit and joined a revolutionary group “The League of the Just,” which was linked with a few international organizations, gathered together under the heading The Communist League.  In 1847, they asked Marx and Engels to write a document articulating their core ideas, and they produced the Manifesto.  It opened with the famous sentence, “the history of all hitherto existing society is the history of class struggle.”  We’ll read that in two weeks, but for just note that it expresses one of the key tenets of Marx’s way of thinking: class rules the world.  If you want to understand why things happen the way to do, you need to trace people’s ideas, actions, feelings, back to their class position – are they workers, are they owners.  These fundamentally define your identity, and the conflicts among classes – not Ideas or Theologies – create the conflicts which create history.Then, in 1848, revolutions broke out across Europe.  The dreams of the many radicals had seemingly been realized – workers, students, intellectuals, reformers united against the government and the owners of big business to radically change the social order, just as the emergent business class had revolted against the Old Aristocratc Regime.  But the revolution failed; the governments cracked down.  The movement was shattered, many moved off to North America to found utopian communes.Marx had to leave Frace, and so he went to London, where he pretty much stayed for the rest of his life, working in the British National Museum.  Though he maintained revolutionary hopes, his writings from this point on become more social analytical and social historical.  We’ll read selections from maybe the most important of these, Capital, next week.  Marx spent years in that library, reading and re-reading Adam Smith and Ricardo, and pouring through reports on factories.  He was very poor, and never really seriously looked for a regular job.  In any case, he thought that providing an “anatomy” of the whole structure of capitalist society was more important than eating well or much.  Three of his children died of malnutrition or lack of proper care.  The rest of his family was always sick, as was he.  Only Engels generosity kept him alive.Marx mostly spent the rest of his life working on Capital.  The workers movemet in England was not as radical as in Paris, they were mostly looking for better wages and working conditions, not total revolutionary transformation.  But in 1863 many labor movements from different countries starting working together, and they eventually formed a group called the International, made up of anarchists and followers of Proudhon and also of our friend Comte, among others.  Marx had been sort of aloof to this kind of stuff, but he got involved in this movement, and pretty much took it over.  The movement that was pretty small until then (when Marx spoke about “our party,” he was usually referring to Engels and himself) now had a real international presence.  So when he published Capital in 1867, it was must reading for all radicals, and was translated into Russian, French, English, and Italian pretty quickly.That lasted until 1871, with the Paris Commune.  After that failed in a blood bath, the International fell apart.  He didn’t produce much more intellectual work, mostly receiving radical visitors who wanted to consult with the Great Man.  He died in 1883, about 10 people attended his funeral, and the public didn’t really notice his death.IDEOLOGY CRITIQUE	Our first theme with Marx will be his notion of ideology critique.  And we’ll take it in two parts, first ideology, and then critique.  So, ideology.  Marx took one of his great contributions to be the notion that not ideas but practices make the world go around, the material basis of our lives, how we work, produce, how we get our hands in the dirt, are what is ultimately real and decisive for understanding why societies are they way they are.  And these, in the end, determine even our loftiest ideals, even our highest religious, poetic, philosophical ideals are rooted and shaped by what goes on the factory floor, or wherever we work.  This means that those religious, philosophical, and poetic ideals which we do have are in fact covers – cover-ups – for our material economic existence.  One of Marx’s first important projects was to show this, or to build on others who had already shown it – that is, to show that religion is really an expression of the material existence of religious people.  He did this by engaging with a famous author at the time, Ludwig Feuerbach, who had written a very controversial book called “The Essence of Christianity.”  In it, Feuerbach argued that God is basically a human projection.  God is not real, but human needs are real, and out of those needs, we create Gods, to whom we then go on to subject ourselves.  Gods embody our highest ideals that we could never actually live up to, like love; or they are screens onto which we project our fears and hopes – the world is a threatening place, and we create gods to have somebody to make it more hospitable and less fearsome.  But then, we have to worry about what gods think, and we become even more afraid, since we are now afraid of gods as well.  That’s where Marx starts, and his Theses try to push those ideas even further.There is one movement guiding the theses, with several aspects.  The easiest way to think about the overall picture is to characterize Feuerbach within a major shift in how people think about religion.  It had been underway for many years, but Feuerbach gave an especially powerful presentation of the view.  THEOLOGY TO ANTHROPOLOGY.  Most fundamentally, we can think of this as a shift “from theology to anthropology.”  Traditionally, theology was the main way to think about religion.  When you do theology, you ask about the logos of theos.  That is, you are trying to understand the logic, structure, word, mind of God.  You are starting with God, and asking about who God is, what God wants, what God thinks, what God does.  Then, once we understand THAT as well as you can, you draw conclusions about human beings: if God wants us to be pure, we should be pure, if God wants us to be just, we should be just, if God wants us to take righteous vengeance on our enemies, we should do that, etc.  Crudely summarized: conclusions about human beings (anthropology) are dependent on conclusions about God (theology).  Feuerbach’s work, as well as that of others, reflects, but also seeks to change, the direction.  The idea is that FIRST you think about the logos of man, anthropology.  That is, you are trying to understand the logic, structure, word, mind, feelings, desires, of mankind.  You are starting with mankind, and asking about “who man is,” what humans want, what humans think, what humans do, what humans need.  Then, once you understand THAT as well as you can, you draw conclusions about God: if humans are insecure and alienated, then God will provide comfort and wholeness (that’s Feuerbach, but there are other possibilities: if humans, say, are integrated and whole, sure of themselves, then maybe their gods will tend to stir things up, knock them down; if humans have rich interior lives, then their gods will provide a resource for personal meaning and inward self-exploration).  Crudely summarized: conclusions about God (theology) are dependent on conclusions about mankind (anthropology).Broadly speaking, Marx welcomes this shift.  But he does not think it goes far enough.  It does not go far enough because it stops with generic anthropological and psychological tendencies – people feel this way, individuals suffer some kind of personal alienation, and they project Gods, in Feuerbach’s approach.  FROM ANTHROPOLOGY TO SOCIOLOGY.  But Marx thought that the key source of alienation is not personal or individual.  It is social.  The way different social structures make us work and labor is the most essential determinant of alienation, for him.  Thus, to go beyond Feuerbach and get to the true roots of our theological and cultural ideas, Marx believes you need to get past individual qualities and study how different ways of organizing labor and production determine different understandings of religion.  The name later given to this was: tracing the cultural “super-structure” back to its economic “base.”  As the base changes, the cultural superstructure, or ideology, will change.  Economics determines individual attitudes (psychology) as well as culture and religion (theology).IDEALISM AND MATERIALISM.  This basic idea – theology to anthropology to sociology – makes understanding the other key themes of the theses relatively straightforward.  First, there’s IDEALISM AND MATERIALISM.  Idealism means that culture, ideas, theologies are independent variables that drive dependent variables like forms of economic production (agriculture, manufacturing, etc.), types of government, families, etc.  Materialism reverses the relationship: material concerns, like jobs, property, wealth, are the independent variables, and culture, theology, etc. are the dependent variables.  Marx advocated materialism in this sense.INTERPRETING VS. CHANGING THE WORLD.  Then, there’s INTERPRETING VS. CHANGING THE WORLD.  If theology and idealism and psychology are primary (independent variables), then if you understand our ideas, feelings, and attitudes about the world, then you’ll see why the world works as it does.  If you change the ideas, you change the world.  You change ideas by reinterpreting them.  If material concerns are primary, changing how you think is meaningless.  You have to rearrange the material conditions in which we think to change ideas.  So interpretation is pointless: you change the material world, you change the intellectual world.  However, there is a problem.  The material world is what matters.  But many people BELIEVE that ideas matter; and if you say “the material world needs to be changed, here is my blueprint for what a better world will look like,” then what is that?  Another idea, another quasi-religious empty picture of a better world.  How do you deal with these problems, then, if you’re Marx?  His answer is: critique: it is a process through which you move from existing ideas and existing concerns to get people to a point where they want to move themselves to action, because they have to, not to get to some better place or better imaginary ideal, but because they come to feel that their own world is in some way breaking apart, suffering, and they need to try to fix it and heal it.  Let’s elaborate.FOR A RUTHLESS CRITICISM OF EVERYTHING EXISTINGWhat does Marx mean by critique?1.  to judge.  What does it mean to say that theory is critical?  Start with the word: critique.  What does it mean?  To exercise judgment. A critic judges.  A critical theorist uses the theoretical tools of conceptual analysis in order to render some judgment, some verdict, about society.   Well, that sounds annoying.  Who is going to listen to some critic criticizing everything ruthlessly?  Nobody, if the critic only proposes abstract ideals like universal human brotherhood. The kind of critique Marx was after was supposed to be IMMANENT.2.   immanent.  That means internal.  When Marx critiques society, he is trying to show that society itself is judging itself.  That society itself is in contradiction with itself, even if nobody knows it.  The job of the critique is to make apparent what is concealed, to show that, whether or not we know it, we are ALREADY self-critics, already, according to OUR OWN LIGHTS, not living up to our implicit commitments.  Think of MLK and the civil rights movement as an example.  He said: read the Declaration of Independence.  It says that all men are created equal.  The constitution says: we the people.  Yet look around the society. Yes, everybody may have the right to vote.  But they do not live socially in such a way that they are in an equal position to exercise that right, to be treated with respect and dignity at school, work, at home, etc.  Your political practice, your basic political documents, commit you to the idea of civil equality. But every day that you do not move toward civil rights, you are in contradiction with yourself.  Actually, your ideals of equality blind you from the fact that you are living in an unequal society – “all men created equal” has to be more than an ideal, it has to be something lived out in restaurants and on buses.  That’s the idea of immanent critique: you have to start where people are at, and show them that, according to themselves, they are not fully what they profess to be.  Only then can you move them to accept the truth, which is that they are, according to Marx, perpetuating basic social inequality.  This is why he says critique is confession: you get people to admit dark truths.Another way to think of it is like social psychoanalysis.  The analyst puts the patient on the couch.  The patient is complaining that he keeps getting himself in bad relationships, can never have a stable girlfriend.  The analyst knows that the real reason is that he wants to kill his father and sleep with his mother.  But you can’t say that to a patient right away; you have to get somebody to get to a place where they can accept them; you have to take their starting point at good money.  Likewise: if people have a starting point of certain religious ideals (say of Christian equality) or political ideals (of democracy) you have to start there and get from there to the underlying truth – which, in this case, is, as we’ll see in more detail, that capitalist exploitation of the working class is the real source of social and political and religious tensions in a societyHaving gained that clarity, you may be able to act with clear eyes, unblinded by distorting ideas.  But how is that to work?  How do you move from ideology (whatever that is) to revolutionizing practice?  Let’s see Marx in action doing that, in the Jewish Question.JEWISH QUESTIONThis essay gives us a good example of critique at work.  He starts from some existing concern that a lot of people had: political democracy, getting equal rights.  And he tries to show that achieving this, on its own, is self-contradictory.  And he tries to get somebody committed to that ideal to confess this, to render a verdict against himself.  And then to point from this contradiction out, if only in a vague way, to what would be required to remedy it.  How does it work?Start with Bauer’s argument.  It is about:1.  POLITICAL RIGHTS AND RELIGIOUS IDENTITY.  Bauer says that for a religious minority – in this case, Jews – to gain political rights, they need to give up their religious identity.  Not only them, but in fact, EVERYBODY must do so.  This is because, for him, exercising our rights as citizens is a secular activity; the modern state is secular.  Thus, if Jews want political rights, Germany needs to create a secular state, with no preference for Christians, so that all people participate as secular citizens.  From Jews, Christians, Hindus, Muslims, etc. to CITIZENS.2.  POLITICAL SOCIETY VS. CIVIL SOCIETY.  Marx says: not so fast.  Look beyond Germany.  In the U.S., you have a secular state, which all citizens can participate, regardless of religious creed.  Everybody can vote, and “citizen” is a role open to everybody, regardless of how much property you have, regardless of whether or not you believe that Jesus is the son of god.  Draw diagram:  top is sovereign, which equals citizen.  Then all people directly related to the sovereign, as individuals.  But: outside of politics, everybody is highly religious.  Therefore, a secular state does not imply a non-religious civil sphere.  Then, Marx goes beyond religion, to the civil sphere more broadly: not only are there abiding differences in terms of religion, but also in terms of property, wealth, and we could add now, gender and ethnicity.  When we gather as citizens, in, say, a town hall meeting, and exercise our political rights to decide our common political fate, it is possible that these distinctions might be momentarily set aside.  But as soon as we step out of the meeting, these civil distinctions assert themselves.  Only people from a certain religion might be hired for certain jobs; only people with a certain gender or ethnic identity might be admitted into certain restaurants; people with more property and wealth are treated with deference, have better houses, live in better neighborhoods, etc.  In sum: political rights and political equality in no way guarantees civil equality.  POLITICAL EMANCIPATION VS. HUMAN EMANCIPATION.  What this means is that gaining political rights and the political status “citizen” does not equal full, genuine, freedom, equality, and emancipation.  In fact, political community and political emancipation is self-contradictory: it pretends that we are equal by offering ideals of freedom and equality in voting rights, but winks as we know that we are not equal in the rest of our lives, which is most of our lives, the part that is really the most important anyway, that part that we treat as basic rights of man: of property, security, of religion.  None of that is equal and free.  Again, the civil rights movement is the best example: blacks had the legal right to vote.  But socially, they are not fully free and equal members of society.  What would it mean to remedy this?  Marx gets very vague here.  Talks about human emancipation.  In a general way, it would mean removing all of those blocks to equality in the civil sphere.  It would mean taking that kind of equality and solidarity and liberty indicted by political democracy, in those rare moments when race, class, gender, etc. don’t matter and we are all citizens, and extending that into every other part of life.  But I don’t think that Marx does or really can (by his theory) give much detail about what that would look like.  What he wants is for people to think that there is something wrong with the world they live in, and in their lives to work toward changing it.  What that will mean concretetly cannot be deduced by theory, it can only be worked out in action.  But what critical theory can do is get you to see that what seemed natural to you is artificial, and what seems artificial is natural.  What might have seemed the most natural to you before reading Marx is that you are defined by your personal religion, property, business, race, gender.  Marx wants you to see all of that as artificial.  Whereas your political identity as a citizen might have seemed artifical, a hat you only put on rarely and which masks these other deeper and more divise individual differences, now you are supposed to see that as the most real thing about you.  And if you make that switch, you will have rendered a critical judgment on the world, most of your life will seem false, and taken the first step toward changing it in your practices.ALIENATION.One of the main ideas that has been coming up in our discussion so far is this idea of “being in contradiction with yourself” in some way or another.  It is one of Marx’s basic ideas, or, more accurately, it describes a process that he thinks fundamentally drives human history.  Human beings can be at odds with themselves, he thought. He called this process “alienation,” and he thinks that it lies behind capitalist society.  He thought that it could get you, in a way, behind or even deeper than where Adam Smith started.  Remember the “original state.”  Everybody kept the produce of their labor, until, for whatever reason, some people ended up with a stock pile, others had nothing, and had to sell their labor for wages?  Smith’s analysis basically STARTED there.  Marx says that is too late.  How can it be that people work not for the products of their work but just for wages and that they have to give up the product, sell their laboring activity, sell their productive relationship to the world, to somebody else?  IF that happens, then there is private property, and Smith’s world unfolds.  But that is a consequences, not the driver.  Alienation is the true source of private property.  So to understand commercial society, we have to first understand what it means to say that humans have become alienated.What does alienation mean?  Need to focus on the word “alien.”  It means “other.”  On a personal level, feeling alienated means feeling other than yourself, like you look out at your life, your job, your friends, your school, your neighborhood, and you just don’t see yourself IN any of it.  It’s like you’re a stranger to yourself, you don’t know, or can’t really understand and accept, who you’ve become.Marx is interested in alienation not on a personal level, but on a social level.  He wants to understand the social conditions, in particular the economic conditions, which make individuals exist in way that they become “strangers to themselves,” separated from the sorts of people they take themselves to be.This implies some account of what they become separated from, an account of what it would be to NOT be alienated, to be somehow “at home” or “familiar” with yourself.  Marx doesn’t get too explicit about this, but its implicit in what he says, and we can tease out some key components.  Understandign this is essential, because Marx’s analysis of the contradictions in capitalism aims to show up some deep contradiction between who we are, our natures, and how we must work in capitalist society.  So what are those elements of our humanity that get somehow corrupted or perverted in capitalist workplaces?The answer is labor.  We are, at our deepest core, workers.  That part of who we are pervades everything else.  It is our basic capacity to reshape the world through our activity in it.  Quote from Capital, captures ideas in today’s readings well:“Labour is, in the first place, a process in which both man and nature participate, and in which man of his own accord starts, regulates, and controls the material reactions between himself and nature…by thus acting on the external world and changing it, he at the same time changes his own nature.  He develops his slumbering powers and compels them to act in obedience to his way…We presuppose labour in a form that stamps it as exclusively human. A spider conducts operations that resemble those of a weaver and a bee puts to shame many an architect.  But what distinguishes the worst architect from the best of bees is this, that the architect raises his structure in imagination before he erects it in reality… He not only effects a change of form in the material on which he works, but he also realizes a purpose.”There are three major elements to Marx’s notion of labor.1. Objectification.a. Production reflects purpose.  Labor brings into reality something that was in imagination.  The thing we create crystallizes purposes and ideas.  Works of Art, and products, are embodied ideas.  A chair realizes, objectifies, what was in the mind of the maker.2. Material.a. Works with material nature to satisfy our material needs.  Labor establishes an essential relatioship between human needs and the material objects of our need (food, shelter, but eventually a lot more).3. Self-transformationa. Labor does not just transform nature; it transforms our nature, our needs, our consciousness.  Think of an artist.  You make something, and it expresses some idea you had.  It objectifies your imagination, actually, it objectifies you, gives you some enduring existence in the world that will outlast you.  But that process also changes you.  Your ideas may change as you make the thing, or you may see something new that also needs to be objectified.  Andn once you make the artwork, you can see things in the completed work that you didn’t intend to put there, or others can point those out to you, leading you to potentially reinterpret what it was that you were doing all along.  Moreover, by objectifying our imagination, we often create new needs.  This can happen in art and religion: for Marx, we create Gods as objectifications of ourselves, but then we start to have new needs, namely, of pleasing these gods.  We create cars to get where we neeed to go, but then we need highways.  Without the cars, no need for highways.  The need is a product of human activity.  We need companionship from pets, so we need to feed them.  We need to feed them well and keep them healthy, so we need diet dog food.  Labor and production transform us and our needs, creating new needs.  This makes history.Alienation means becoming separated from this basic human process of labor and objectification.  Capitalism alienates us, Marx says.  How does that work?Generally, it means that we do not see our labor as an expression of our purposes and imaginations.  We are not objectified.  We work for somebody else – what we make objectifies HIS purposes, not mine.  Labor is no longer simply an expression of our capacities; it has been reduced to a mere means for getting other stuff (money), depriving it of any intrinsic value.  Because our labor does not belong to us anymore, it doesn’t transform us.  We become alinated from our most basic human potential.  Let’s spell that out, using Marx’s words and ideas.Central to Marx’s analysis is that he sees capitalism as a two class system, owners and producers.  Capitalists own the means of production, and they employ the workers, buying their labor time, and thereby “earning” the right to the final products.  Another way to visualize this is through the separation of workplaces from the home.  For workers, they are not “at home” in the workplace, literally.  The activity that now goes on there is not essential to them; their family lives, their basic sustenance, their neighborhoods – all of that is “who they really are.”  Read p. 74.  So I really only feel myself, feel myself being true to myself, when I am NOT at work.  At work, I am owned by somebody else.  So I feel freely active ONLY in what Marx calls my animal functions; while in the most essentially human process of production, I am simply an animal.  What should be human becomes animalistic; what should be animalistic becomes the only source of humanity left. There are four components to alienation.1. Alienation from productive activity.2. Alienation from the product3. from fellow workers4. human potential.Productive Activity:What am I doing at work?  Not producing objects according to MY ideas, or working to DIRECTLY satisfy my needs.  At work, I am not expressing myself.  Instead, I work for a capitalist, who pays me a basic wage in return for the right to use my labor however she or he wants.  My activity is not mine.  Moreover, the DOL excaserbates this.  I do a specialized task, and I don’t have much sense for my role in the total production process.  If I’m just tightening bolts on an engine, I might not see my activity as part of the process of making a car.  My activity bcomes boring, stultifying, not an expression of my self, but a way of getting food, so I can get back to the other place in my life, my home, that matters now.The ProductThe thing I end up making is not mine.  I pour out my labor, my work, my effort into making some product.  But then the owner, who just sat up in the office, takes it away and does what he wants with it.  Think about it.  If you are a worker, and you want to own the thing you make, how can you get it?  You don’t get it because you made it.  You would have to buy it.  You could be starving, and working in a bakery, you don’t get the bread.  Your labor is not there to satisfy your needs.  This means that the things that we buy, what we consume, comes to express our selves, our styles, our world-views, who we are, more than what we make at work.  Our personalities are defined more by what we consume than by the things we have made.   Your music, your clothes, your car, your ipod – you didn’t make any of those, but that’s how you express your personality.  What you make just becomes an arbitrary, insignifcant way to make money to get other stuff.PROBABLY SKIPPrivate property is thus the “product,” Marx writes, of alienation.  You could not have private property without alienation; Smith comes along too late, and just assumes that there IS private property somehow, some have it, others don’t.  Never gets back to the conditions of the possibility of there being “mine” and “yours.”  Marx says that condition is some people becoming alienated.Fellow WorkersAt work, we are forced into competition with our workers.  Owners seek to get the most productivity out of their workers that they can.  They pit one worker against another, or threaten to fire the one who underperforms.  GM, for example.  If you stay, you get some rewards; if you get fired, you’re out.  Either way, you’re hostile to your fellow workers.  Likewise, because of DOL, you do your specialized task, often in isolation.  You become separated from others, not as a cooperative team, but each alone, doing a part that only makes sense in the mind of the owner, but not in yours.Human potentialHave seen this already, but let’s spell it out.  Work could be the transformation and fulfillment of my deepest humanity.  Now it is where we feel least human, least ourselves.  We become, in a way, living machines.  What we do is scripted; we are cogs.  If I work as a host or hostess at a restaurant, say, even my smiles and my greetings are scripted.  Think of Office Space, with the Jennifer Anniston character.  She has to wear “spontaneity buttons,” where she is supposed to “express herself” by choosing from a range of 20 pre-scripted slogans.  In this way, her work becomes totally other to her, made even worse by having to chant slogans about expression.  So alienation is a real existing contradiction built into a certain way of living, in particular, into organizing labor and production into owners and workers, that is, capitalistically.  We cannot think our way out of it.  I may like my employer, and I may identify with the stuff I consume.  But, I spend 8 hours a day split from myself.  The only way to change this is to change it.  LECTURE SEVEN1. Capitala. Mystificationb. Commoditiesc. ExploitationCAPITALMYSTIFICATIONFirst, some background about MYSTIFICATION.  We’ve read and discussed Marx enough to get a feel for one of his basic wyas of thinking.  If we want to give a general name to that modus operandi one promising candidate would be: “demystification.”  Marx is a debunker.  If he sees people and practices invested with some kind of sacred aura, he tries to pull off the halo, bring them down to size.  He wants to show that practices which might seem transcendent, otherworldly, and mysterious are really human activities, driven by human-all-too-human concerns like bread, jobs, power, domination.  The body of Christ taken at holy communion is bread and only bread, nothing more.  To think otherwise is to suffer from an illusion.  Marx wants to free us of these sorts of illusions.We can put this in broader context.  Marx saw his own “debunking” project as part of a bigger project of tearing down a host of delusions that had been blinding European society for years.  You can see this by dividing up the world into three great realms of thought and practice, and seeing how in each one right around Marx’s time historically sacred illusions were being peeled back.  These three realms are: 1) the philosophical/religious 2) the political and 3) the economic.  The first great realm of thought and practice – the philosophical or religious – had been dramatically demystified by people like the philosopher Immanuel Kant who refuted the notion of a rational theology, demonstrating that our understanding of God is conditioned by the structure of our minds; by people like the historian David Strauss, who wrote an immensely significant and popular book called Life of Jesus, which was the first sustained attempt to treat Jesus Christ as Jesus of Nazareth, that is, as a historical individual who was a product of his historical and social situation; and, above all, by people like our friend Feuerbach, who secularized God in The Essence of Christianity.  The overall effect of these efforts was to make the Pope and the Church look like the Wizard of Oz, to pull back the curtain and reveal the little man behind the big voice.  Once the clouds of incense clear, we see the church, Marx thought, as a secular institution, created by humans, as an instrument of domination.The second great realm, the political, had had its peculiar mystery, magic, and majesty washed away in the bloodbath of the French Revolution.  The head of Europe’s most glorious king rolled into a basket and…nothing happened!  The skies did not open, the sea did not part.  The aura of monarchy was gone.  They were just people, not some higher species.  So what about the third great realm, that practical realm of economics, the one systematically studied by Adam Smith and other political economists?  Well, it looks quite different.  It seems to lack any of that mystery associated with religion and politics.  It doesn’t seem to need any demystifying.  There are strange mysteries in the throne room and behind the alter, but in the marketplace?!!  It’s all plain, illimuninated, clear, in the open.  You trade, bargain, and make no bones about advancing your individual, material interests.  You wear regular clothes, not the Pope’s or King’s jeweled outfit.  You speak in everyday language, not Latin, and you speak in a simple, straightforward, no nonsense way.  And the theorists who wrote about this sphere, wrote in transparent prose – no metaphors or metaphysics, no rationalizations, just down to business.    This is what Marx will call in Capital the realm of freedom, equality, profit, and Bentham.  But Marx thought that, in fact, the market was more deeply mystified than the altar or the throne were – the more deeply so because it SEEMED so straightforward and matter of fact.  For Marx, however, the market was a strange and ghostly place, inhabited by things that behaved like people, and people who were treated, and eventually, treated themselves like things.  The surface it presents in the marketplace of free and equal and fair trades in fact conceals the dark, human truth: that it rests fundamentally and systematically on exploitation.  You probably noticed this weird mystical language in your reading, all of Marx’s strange statements about the “hieroglyphs” in commodities and market exchange, how they are like “the Lamb of God,” about their “metaphysical niceties” and “ghostly” qualities, their “magic and necromancy,” and the way he says this whole, capitalist world is, in some way, “crazy.”  This sort of language is sprinkled throughout the opening chapters of Capital.  Why?  I think this comparison to demystifying religion and politics helps us to provide an answer, and thus to organize our reading of these difficult and strange pages.  The answer is: in contrast to religion and politics, which, in a way, come wearing their mystery on their sleeves, capitalist economic life is so mysterious that we don’t notice it.  We are so deeply enmeshed in this weirdness and illusion that we can’t see it – like a person living in the 14th century who thought that God and spirits and demons were just as real as corn and tables and chairs.  In this sort of situation, the PRIMARY task cannot be to demystify.  It has to be to demonstrate the fact that capitalist modes of producing and organizing the way we work ARE mysterious.  You have to first bring out the metaphysical bizarreness of commodities before you tear it down to earth.  This gives us insight into the structure of our reading:  The first part, about commodities, “congealed labour,” and the “fetishism of the commodity and the secret thereof” are all about getting us to be deeply puzzled at the weirdness and craziness of the world in which we all normally move about, the world of commodities for exchange.  Then, once we are sufficiently amazed that we live in this topsy-turvy, upside down, supernatural  world, we proceed to expose its dark side, bring it down to earth, just like Feuerbach and the French Revolutionaries did for religion and politics.  This is where we move from the light of day in the marketplace to what, for Marx, REALLY and NECESSARILY makes capitalism tick: the exploitation of workers in factories; the dark, dehumanizing world not of free exchange among equals at the market, but of owners sucking surplus value out of their workers.  So we have two themes, then: Commodities (and their mysteriousness), and Exploitation (their dark reality).  Let’s take them each in more detail.COMMODITIESTwo aspects of their mysteriousness: 1. Non-physical, relative, transcendent essence2. Congealed LaborRead first sentences.  Pp. 302.Like we saw last time: start with people where they’re at.  Take your experience as a starting point, and try to bring out how much weirdness is contained in what we take for granted.  In this case we start with the question:  what is a commodity in daily life?  Something put forward as an item for exchange and purchase?  What is that?  What kind of a thing is that?  How do we actually perceive commodities?  What properties do they possess which make them into commodities.Well, all of us, by the time we are buying candy at the corner store or play a video game, have had the experience of perceiving the price of a commodity, its cost, its value, as one of its intrinsic properties.  You see a Mercedes, and it looks and really feels expensive, deeply different than a Hyundai.  You don’t have to go through a long list of all the things that you can exchange a Mercedes for if you have one; it looks expensive and valuable, just like elephants look big or lead feels heavy.  If you show me a guitar, I’ll think its nice.  If you say it’s a vintage Les Paul, the wood will start to glow.  If I thought it was a vintage Les Paul, and it turns out to be fake, it dwindles in my eyes, the aura recedes.  It seems that the value of a commodity is as immediately given, as much a matter of feeling and perceiving, as are their colors, tastes, and shapes.  Just like it might seem to a person immersed in Catholicism that Christ is perceivable in the host or to 16th century Frenchman that the majest and authority of the King is perceivable in his scepter.Marx says this is totally deluded and delusional.  What, again, is a commodity?  What are its properties?   Read top of 303.  “A commodity is in the first place an object outside us, a thing that by its properties satisfies human wants of some sort or another.”  This seems to be the first type of quality that we can ascribe to commodities: what Smith called, and Marx follows him in calling, their “use-value.”  These are its properties in virtue of which it satisfies human wants – its weight, color, texture, chemical properties, etc.  The commodity, on the basis of its use-value, possesses these properties wherever and whenver it exists.  Its relation to other things is irrelevant to these properties.  Bread has the property of providing nutrition to humans.  Take that bread 1000 miles and 1000 years away, it still has those properties.  A coat protects us from the elements under ANY social and ideological conditions.  So, it SEEMS like the use-value, natural properties of a commodity are its REAL property.  Thus, whatever science and our physical senses tell us about these properties reveals the essential nature of commodities to us.  There is NO mystery here in use-value.  But wait.  Commodities, in fact, are not physical objects at all.  They are no more physical than are spirits and the King’s aura.  The natural properties that strike us – like the bread’s nutritional content or the coat’s water-tight material – are strictly speaking not properties of those items AS COMMODITIES AT ALL.  In fact, you cannot, strictly speaking, perceive a commodity with your senses, no more than you can perceive spirits or demons.  10 meters of linen, viewed AS CLOTH, can be seen, felt, cut, sewn, folded, packaged, transported from factory to retail outlet.  But that same ten yards of linen, AS A COMMODITY, cannot be seen, felt, or physically manipulated.  Why?  Because, as a commodity, it is ONLY what it can be exchanged for.  The linen is ONLY the amount of shoes you can get for it; the shoes are ONLY the amount of corn you can get for it.  In fact, if you possess linen as a commodity, you don’t care at all about any of its properties.  The more you do, the worse you are at really assessing its value as a commodity.  If you have a bunch of bread-commodity, the last thing you want to do is inhale its rich, deep, aroma.  That’s a distraction.  You want to calculate how much Of SOMETHING ELSE you can get for it.  As we saw in Smith, as an object to be exchanged, you can hate corn.  This is the significance of Marx’s long and seemingly tedious discussion of linen and coats.  The whole aim is to get us to see the weird fact that commodities only have “relative” existences, they have no reality in themselves.  Marx drives this home on page 316 and 317:“A coat as such no more tells us it is value, than does the first piece of linen we take hold of.  This shows that when placed in value-relation to the linen, the coat signifies more than when out of that relation, just as many a man strutting about in gorgeous uniform counts for more than when in mufti.”  And again: “The linen acquires a value-form different from its physical form.  The fact that it is value, is made manifest by its equality with the coat, just as the sheep’s nature of a Christian is shown in his resemblance ot the Lamb of God.”  Here it is, again: political leaders get their aura nor from any scientifically ascertainable qualities, but through the relation to others their gorgeous uniform puts them in.  Take away the relation, then you take away the aura, and you’re left with the man.   Example of dropping a French King or Catholic Priest into Africa in 3000 BC.  The scepter is nothing more than a hard stick; the wafer is nothing more than a piece of bread.  Similarly, drop a commodity somewhere else, and it retains its use value, but its exchange value vanishes or at least totally changes: you can still eat your bread, but you have no idea whether you can trade it for anything else or for how much.  THAT is not IN the bread, and it can’t be pereceived or studied there.  It is, strictly speaking SUPERNATURAL.  Read p. 321.Another way Marx tries to talk about this is in terms of the way in which things, as commodities, are changed into “something transcendent.”  (320).  Read 320.  What does “transcendent” mean?  It means: going beyond.  The transcendent realm in religion is the realm beyond this world.  Commodities are transcendent, mystical, in that they “go beyond themselves.”  We treat them as if they could talk to one another.  Read p. 321, on the analogy to religion.  It’s as if we had a movie where you enter into a store and, like gods, all the items were talking to one another.  A nightmare, made by us, now controlling us.  This is the first aspect of the mysteriousness of commodities: we think we experience commodities as physical things, with inherent properties oriented to US, but in fact, they are mysterious, ethereal, unreal things, oriented to ONE ANOTHER.  And we are subservient to them, making linen to get corn to get cars to get...and so on. Like Frankenstein’s monster or getting lost in the Kingdom of Heaven and never getting back to earth.CONGEALED LABORSo, the first aspect of the mysteriousness of commodities has to do with the way they delude us about the physical use qualities of things.  The second aspect of that mysteriousness involves the way it deludes us about the character of labor.  How do they do that?  Let’s start by reading Marx on p. 305.  Before we do, let’s be clear about the question he seems to be answering.  It is: if commodities are not physical objects, then WHAT ARE THEY?  If their value does not come from any of their natural qualities, IN VIRTUE OF WHAT are the linen, the coat, the corn, and the iron, valuable things, things we want, commodities.  Now read p. 305.What is Marx saying here?  Let’s put it this way: if one commodity is somehow equal to another, if its value comes from its orientation to something else it can be exchanged for, then there must be some “third thing” in virtue of which they are comparable.  This “third thing” would have to be equally present in each commodity, somehow.  However much of this third thing is present in one commodity tells you how much value it has, and so is the source of that magical aura of value around commodities.  What is that “third thing?  Already saw the answer Marx wants to expose in Smith: labor.Marx says that, for capitalists, the exchange value that provides the “commodity-ness of the commodity” comes from the fact that commodities are “crystals of abstract homogenous labor.”  You can’t see the exchange value congealed into each commodity, you can’t smell it or touch it.  But, nevertheless, its VALUE is contained in the products of labor as a consequence of their being produced by workers hired by capitalists in a system of market exchange regulated by competition.  This is where the value comes from: in the production process, bits of this stuff – homogenous, standardized, labor – that had been congealed in previously produced commodities or somehow transmitted into newly produced commodities.  As the spindle is turning and cotton is turned into wool, it smoothly, magically, invisibly, passes on little invisible bits of its congealed labor into the collecting thread.  When the spindle breaks, though it looks the same, is made out of the same wood, etc., its invisible crystals of labor value are exhausted (unless you can sell it to somebody).  Remember, this is basically what Smith says: you can find out how much value something has for exchange if you find out how much labor went into it.  Takes a lot of labor to get diamonds, so they have value.  Takes a lot of labor to produce a Mercedes, so it has value.  This means that all labor must in some way be equal, and all that matters is how much is consumed in making some product.  This is what it means to say that commodities are “hieroglyphs”: when you see one of them, you are supposed to not see IT, but look past it, treat it as a symbol, of something else, invisibly contained in it: congealed labour.This stuff – congealed labor – is what Marx is saying is the passionate and single-minded purpose of the hardheaded, apparently down-to-earth businessmen.  They want to get as much of this transcendent, invisible, ectoplasmic, crystal stuff as they can.  And they want it not to actually use any of it or because of its physical qualities – they get no pleasure from laboring, and in fact, it has no physical qualities at all!  They want it to…get more of it!  When they are old, the “metaphysical entrepreneurs” might fall down to earth, and cash in their crystal of values for inferior things of the flesh, like houses and clothes – just like a monk who lost the faith might eventually trade in his transcendent hopes for a good meal.  But when they are active, young, all the temptations of the material world is to be shunned.  So here it is:  what LOOKS like hard-headed business is metaphysical idealism!  Marx’s whole effort so far has been to get us to see this whole situation as crack-brained, and crazy.  But this craziness is: our craziness.  Read p. 324.  Its crazy because these kinds of labor and products are not the same, they are not homogenous.  This is the significance of the examples Marx goes on to give in the next few pages.  Crueso makes different things to satisfy his needs on his island.  He is always aware of how the different kinds of labor and products fit with different needs.  If he works more for food, its because he needs more food; if he works to make a house, its because he needs a shelf. His work, and his products, are different according to their different qualities.   Likewise, in feudal society, when peasants grow food, the know its for their dinner; its qualities are visible.  When they are forced to give their share to the Lord, they know that the lord is eating the result of their sweat.  Or in a family, each person does their work, in different ways, and everybody understand how what they are making is connected to their needs and use. There is a direct, personal relationship between their work and the use.  Reac p. 325.  Capitalism distorts all this.  It makes weaving, cooking, farming, building, and everything else into standardized, routine, operations, whose only difference is their quantity, not their quality.  Capitalism turns a world of qualitiative difference into quantitative sameness.  Again, think of the religious analogy: we are all one in the body of Christ; we are all one as abstract labour.  EXPLOITATION.1. Profits come from production, not exchange.2. Labor and Surplus ValueSo this is the mysteriousness of commodities in capitalism.  Now we’re mystified, and we see the extent to which our daily life is filled with “metaphysical niceties” and mystical qualities.  The next task is to debunk all this, to take away the aura around commodity value by demonstrating that this value, necessarily, is generated by exploitation, one human dominating another.  How does that work?Marx begins by summarizing most of what he’s said so far into a “general formula.”  In non-capitalist societies, if we deal with commodities, we do so according to what Marx calls the “simplest formula.”  It is:C—M—C.  What it says is: you start with some commodity, say, corn.  But you want shoes.  So you trade the corn for some money.  Then you trade the money for some shoes.  And, voila, you’ve got shoes!  Note, this whole formula is driven by use-values, and the natural properties of the commodities, corn and shoes.  You’ve got extra corn, you feet are cold, so you trade the corn, mediated by money, to get some commodity with a set of natural properties that will keep your feet warm.The capitalist formula is different, as we’ve seen.  It is:M—C—M.  What this formula syas is: you’ve got some money.  You want more money.  How are you going to get more money?  It doesn’t fall from heaven.  So you trade it for some commodity, say, for shoes.  You don’t care about the shoes for any of their qualities at all.  You have the shoes so you can trade them for: more money.  That’s capitalism.But wait, says Marx.  Slow down.  How does this work?  How does your original amount of money turn into more money?  Where does the change in value come from?  It can’t come from the first trade, from trading your money for the shoes.  You have 100$, and now you have 100$ of shoes, after all.  And now, well, you’ve got $100 of shoes.  And if you trade that for money you’ve got…$100!  Huh?This means that the creation of surplus value CANNOT happen, Marx thought, through exchanges in the open market.  That whole sphere, out their in the light of day, is not where the profit comes from.  According to Marx, in fact, Smith, since he only focuses on market exchanges, cannot explain where profits come from.  In order to understand profits, thefore, you have to lead the blinding light and enter into the dark clarity of the process of production.  You have to follow the capitalist, Mr. Moneybags, as he finds a peculiar kind of commodity – labor-power – and takes it by the collar down into the depths of the factory.  Read p. 336.  P. 343.  Pp. 350-351.  Talk about Plato.  When the owner and the worker meet in the market, it looks free and equal, an exchange based on mutual interests.  The owner needs somebody to turn his cotton into wool, the worker needs wages to pay for his dinner.  A fair contract.  It seems like that out in the open.  What happens then, inside the factory.  I’m going to summarize key aspects of 351-355, the production of surplus value, trying to slightly simplify the story to bring out Marx’s point.  Here’s another way of putting what he’s saying:So, you’re the capitalist.  And you’ve got $100.  You want to turn it into more money.  You’ve decided to go into the wool business.  To make wool, you’ll need some cotton, a spindle, and labor.  So, you buy:$25 worth of cotton = 10 pounds of cotton.  This cotton required, let’s say, 2 hours of labor to produce.  So that is its exchange value.  It congeals 2 hours of labor.  12.50 per hour.$25 worth of spindle = 1 spindle.  The spindle required, let’s say, 2 hours to produce.  So that is its exchange value.  It congeals 2 hours of labor.$50 worth of labor, which is how much you say you’ll pay the worker for the day.  This is another way of saying that it takes 4 hours of labor to produce all the things needed to keep the worker alive for another day.  That is the workers exchange value as a commodity.  He is 4 hours of congealed labor.Now you set the laborer to work for a day, and he uses up all the cotton.  What do you have when its over: 10 pounds of wool.  Great.  Well, how much is its value, now?  There’s been now 8 hours of labor congealed in the wool, right: 2 hours passed on from the cotton; 2 hours passed on from the spindle; and 4 hours passed on from the worker spinning.  8 hours.  At 12.50$ per congeald hour of labor, that means our wool, after the production process, is worth…$100!!! Woah?  What happendd? Read p. 355, top. 356, top 357..So we’re stuck with all this wool.  WE hate wool, we don’t care about it.  WE want to turn it into MORE MONEY.  But we can’t, can we.  Not so fast. The fact that 4 hours labour is required to keep the worker alive to the next day (which is why the capitalist pays him $50) does not prevent him from working 8 hours, now does it.  Thus, I pay my worker $50, since that is the amount of labor needed to keep him alive, meaning that he’s worth 4 hours.  But then he works another 4 hours.  And I don’t have to pay him any more.  So I throw in another $25 of cotton (2 hrs) and another 2hrs worth of spindle (25$).  That costs me 50 more dollars.  But now, in the next four hours, if the worker works at the same rate, I’ve got another 10 pounds of wool.  So I have 20 total pounds of wool.    How much labor does it “congeal.”  Well, there’s now 8hrs from the cotton and spindle, which were required to get the cotton and the spindle I used.  And now there’s 8 hours of spinning-work by my worker.So it contains 16 total hours.  At 12.50 per hour, that is: $200.  But I’ve only paid for 4hrs of labor to the worker, plus now 4 total hours worth of cotton and 4 of spindles.  That’s 12 hours, or $150.  And, voila!  I’ve turned $150 into $200.  It is a necessary condition of capitalist society that workers are exploited.  They must have the products of their labor taken from them, the value they generate extracted appropriated from them.  Again, alienation and exploitation is built into the system.  It is systematically unfair – to make money, you simply CANNOT pay workers what they are worth.  Read p. 357, 358.If you have a problem with this, if you disagree with it, you have to find something wrong with these formulas or their assumptions, just like, if you disagree with Newton’s theory of gravity of Einstein’s theory of relativity, you have to find something wrong with their equations or assumptions.  Conclude by noting again Marx’s critical method: he’s trying to show that the political economists like Smith are, by their own lights, at odds with themselves.  They SAY that they are describing a system of free and fair and equal trades, and that this is what they value.  But they also say that the purpose of the system is to genereate profits and increase value.  The ONLY way that can happen is to increase the value of the product, and that, as we’ve seen REQUIRES unfair trades, unequal treatments.  These may be covered up by the illustion of a fair contract between workers and owners, but when you pull back the veil, look back at the Wizard of Oz, you see that all the bluster about the free marketplace is cover for systematic and fundametal exploitation IN THEIR OWN TERMS, for always and necessarily making unfair deals, for paying less than a commodity is worth.  Doesn’t have to do with distorted information or blocks to the marking working properly and briging things to equlibirium where everybody pays the fair price – this IS how the market works; it works because there is a system of production behind it that exploits workers.  LECTURE 81. Communist Manifesto2. Midterm Questions3. AssigmentManifesto as LiteratureHistory as Class Struggle	Bourgeoisie	ProletariatRevolutionTHE COMMUNIST MANIFESTOYou probably could tell right away this is different from the other things we read by Marx.  It is intended as propaganda, a way to get masses of people mobilized around revolutionary goals.  The writing is electric, and millions were energized.  But that is another story.  For us, now, the task is to read sympathetically, and try to get inside our partner’s standpoint.  So, let’s do that.There are three key themes to the Manifesto if we approach it primarily as a dramatic, literary text, which it is:1. Manifesto as  literaturea. An ode to the bourgeoisie: feudalism to capitalism.b. The tragedy of the bourgeoisie: the proletariat.c. The proletarian comedy: communism.MANIFESTO AS LITERATURE.The Manifesto is really one of the greatest pieces of literature ever generated.   And, as such, it trades on powerful literary conventions and tropes to work its effects and move people to action.  NOTE THAT I’M FOCUSING ON THE WAY IT USES MOTIFS FROM TRAGEDY AND COMEDY, BUT YOU COULD (AND SHOULD) ALSO GO TO THE BIBLE AND PROPHETIC MOTIFS.The first part, as we’ll see, is basically a song sung in praise of the bourgeoisie.  They have radically altered the world, unleashed human potentials that had lain dormant until then.  Many of you have probably read Oedipus, by Sophocles.  Think of the Manifesto as like that, up to a point.  Sophocles begins by praising Oedipus – he is one of the greatest kings ever to live, he did something no human had ever done, namely, answer the riddle of the sphinx.  The first part of the manifesto is like that: we are to stand in awe of the New King, the bourgeoisie, the capitalists, the great captains of commercial, indusrial society who have swept away a thousand year of feudal, church, artistocratic, monarchic rule.But this quickly, as in Oedipus, turns into a tragedy.  What is a tragedy?  Not really “something really bad” happening, as we hear it on the news.  More specific, in the classical sense: by being the very best sort of person you can be, and just by pursuing your best qualities as well and steadfastly as you can, you destroy yourself.  Being good leads to bad; you bring yourself down, not by doing anything bad or evil, but by do everything right.  In Oedipus: Oedipus killed his father and married his mother, but he didn’t know it.  He learned that his father had been murdered, and he was told by an oracle to find the murderer.  As a good son and king, he went out to avenge his father.  In doing that well, he ended up discovering the horrible truth.  Marx’s second argument is to say the bourgeoisie are in many ways like Oedipus: they operate within a capitalist form of property, which is private property, and they create more private property and wealth than ever before in human history.  But, in doing so, they create a new class, without property, the prolteriat, who destroy them.  The bourgeoisie dig their own graves – they create the very conditions which bring them down, by being the best bourgeoisie they can be.  They discover the horrible truth that by brilliantly pursuing private property, they generate a world that moves beyond private property, a communist world.  That is their tragedy, from their perspective.But the Manifesto is not a tragedy, it is a comedy.  Not in the sense that it’s funny; it’s not.  But in the classical meaning of comedy: something with a happy ending.  Tragedies don’t have happy endings: things fall apart, we always fail, that’s the human condition.  Deal with it.  The gods laugh at it.  We suffer.  Comedies, by contrast, hold out hope for resolution.  You’ve probably read some of Dante, probably the Inferno.  But the whole thing is the Divine Comedy.  It’s not funny.  But it’s called a comedy because in the end, after journeying through the depths of hell, Dante makes it to heaven, and finds his beloved, Beatrice.  The manifesto envisions something like that: we will go through the hell of capitalism, and maybe even darker depths as states nationalize property and have to liquidate the remnants of the bourgeoisie, but, finally, someday, the state will wither away, and each will work according to his abilities, and be compensated according to his needs. It will be impossible and seem bizarre for one person to prosper without everybody prospering. If you’re a good shoe maker, you make shoes, and the shoes get sent to others who need shoes; the house builders build a house, etc.  In the German Ideology the vision is: hunt in the morning, fish in the afternoon, read poetry and philosophy in the evening.OK, that’s the literary structure.  What is the argument?  How does it get us from A to B to C?1. HISTORY AS CLASS STRUGGLE.All societies most fundamentally defined by their form of property.  These break up individuals into various classes.  Those classes are always at war, even though there may be truces.  The players have changed, however, as the forms of property have changed.  Rome: patrician, knights, plebians, slaves.  Think of Gladiator, if you saw that, or Rome.  Some people were large landowners, from old families.  They ruled, and were the only ones allowed to be senators.  Others were primarily in the army; they had high status.  Plebians, basically the lower classes.  And then slaves, who were property, and could be used by their owners basically like objects.  Like in HBO show, Rome.Middle Ages: have seen a lot about that.  Feudal Lords, serfs, guild masters, apprentices, church.  Property linked with estates, like the church or a noble family.  Example of present day priest: has a house, but can’t sell it.  Not much private property.  Remember discussion of entails and primogeniture in Smith.Modern society, commercial society, ALSO has class antagonisms.  But new class antagonism, basically, as we’ll see, between those with private property, and those without property, who only have their labor to sell for wages.  Note that in modern commercial society, the class division is simplified: there are only two.  Yes, other socities were class-determined, Marx says, but there were many dimensions, like church, kings, aristocracy, peasants, guild masters.  Now there are only two: bourgeois and proleteriat.Bourgeois and ProletarianWell, who are the bourgeoise, and who are the prolteriat? Bourgeois: What happened? Read end of 477-478.1. Feudal origins2. Rise to Political Power3. Revolutionary Character4. Cosmopolitan Character/Globalization5. Urbanization6. Centralizationmodern commercial class.  Expanded, Marx says, from discoveries of new world, new markets, which needed supplies and development.  But the feudal system couldn’t keep up: closed guilds, with a master in a workshop, were not productive enough.  Established manufacturing, industrial production, factories, steam engines, etc.  p. 474.Led to political changes.  Political power follows economic power for Marx.  Base-superstructure.  Refashioning of state as economic development partner.  Read 475.Even more, the bourgeoisie have totally revolutionaized pretty much all parts of life.  475. Read 476 halo quote, and below.* destroyed old aristocraic hierarchies based on natural/hereditary/family superiority.* Exposed power relations and self-interest underlying religious institutions: cui bono.* Exposed personal value as exchange value – you only are how much you can produce for exchange.* Made families into business relationships.  Marry for property, put children to work.More than all this, the bourgeois, commercial society generates CONSTANT revolution.  Nothing remains stable, there is ALWAYS pressure to not only invent new things, but reinvent yourself.  If you can’t do that, you are left behind.  This is thrilling, but potentially deeply unsettling, as everything you are and stand for is open to revision.  Weber on difference between dying in Rome and Middle Ages vs. dying now.  Modernity as unfettered human creativity.  Part of attraction of commuism is finding a new rock: you’ll be placed in the job that suits you, no need for painful process of self-discovery and potential, constantly, of failure.  Dino story.  Read p. 476.Another effect of this: globalization, cosmpolitanism.  The constant revolutionaizing of yourself and what you do breaks down your connection to a particular place, a particular way of life.  You are always ready to imagine another way, yourself being different, and so are open to the strange wide world – in a way that those living in a world that valued stability, local folkways, staying the same, being around people just like you, would not.  Not ONLY globalization in the sense of making things in many countries, spreading out the supply and distribution chain.  But also in consumption: people in Europe started to want Chinese dishes, and vice versa.  Go into a grocery store now, and you’ll be able to consume products from the whole world, in a way that would have been inconceivable 20 years ago.  Yeltsin’s trip to American grocery store.  Read bottom 476, 477.Leads to urbanization, through establishing large commercial and industrial centers – that is, huge factories and workpalces for efficient and large-scale production, and huge markets where the goods and services from the whole world can be found in one place.  Chicago example.  Massive 19th century shift to urban, now up to 50%.  Many novels about this.  477.Then to Centralization: concentrates population in central cities, and property in hands of few, and with it, power and authority.  The rise of the bourgeoise was historically associated with the rise of nation-states with central authority.  From peasants to Frenchmen; American Civil War; German unification.  477.The ProletariatThis pretty much ends the song of the bourgeoisie.  If you stopped here, you would think this was a hymn to their revolutionary achievements.  But now the tragedy begins.Key argumentative move: one form of production was overcome.  We’ve seen it before our eyes in the French Revolution.  Property relations are not fixed in nature, they don’t fall from heaven.  Feudal property seemed natural and eternal to those who lived within it; but it wasn’t.  Private property seems natural and eternal to us – what else could there be?  If you possess it, it’s yours, and you can sell it as you wish.  But, Marx wants to say, it’s not.  And it’s not not only because we can imagine alternatives, but because, by generating more private property, the bourgoisie create a class used to living with an alternative, living without private property: the proletariat.  Read 478 sorcerer.Who are the proletariat and how do the bourgeoisie create them?  Basic answer is that proletarians are people who work for wages and have no property but their own labor property.  They are created by the needs of the property owners and are destined to overthrow those same property owners.  They have nothing, therefore they can potentially be everything, the most universal class into which everybody can eventually be absorbed.  Let’s elaborate.p. 478-479.1. Capital Accumulation Expands.  Capitalism will continue to evolve so that larger and larger amounts of capital will be held by fewer and fewer people. 74 richest Americans have as much wealth as the bottom 19 million.2. Class Unity and Consciousness rises.A. Standardization of labor: traditional hierarchical structure of the working class is destroyed as more and more workers become semi-skilled machine operatives. Abolishes differences between workers on basis of age and sex and skill and particular craft, turning everybody into a cog, a number in an accountant’s notebook. Machines make all labors equal, wages are all equally low.B. Non-class distinctions decline.  Ethic, racial, national, religious forces that might isolate capital and workers are reduced.  We are all workers or capitalists.  Example of people living near factories. Now, I’m a worker first, not an American, or Canadian, or Englishman, or German, or whatever.  Example of people moving to factories in Manchester.C. Globalization.  Internationalziatoin of capitalism generates an even more unified and international working class. Rail travel facilitates communication. Start to form a common identity as workers, since situations are now similar, due to the globalization created by bourgeoisie.3. Periodic crises.  Ever greater booms and busts will afflict capitalism, crises of over production and under production.  These are the internal motors that begins to create more property concentration and more wage labor, as mid-level and small business owners lose their property and fall into the proletariat.  These show one of the main internal contradictions in capitalism: it creates more products than ever have been created, but cannot distribute that surplus, and even destroys much of it.  Have to destroy lots of factories, products, because market falls out, due to oversupply.  Fourier became a radical when he saw French companies dumping bread into the water to keep prices from falling.  Or think of our current economic “crisis” – in part it involves having too many houses – we have too many houses!  Incroyable.  This is totally unheard of –never before had there been TOO MUCH food and goods for people.  But the productive power outstripped the system – since those goods are in the hands of private property out to increase property, the surplus belongs only to a few not to all, and those who have it, as we’ve seen, have it to make more money, not for it to be used, and so want prices to remain high.  The giant masses of empty houses in the United States (with their great granite tables, etc.) are not being distributed to people who need them, are they?  4. Capitalists won’t cooperate.  Dog-eat-dog competitiveness of caitlaism will stop capitlists from cooperating to save capitalism from these crises.5. A total world economic collapse will occur.  Nobody will be protected, and an organized and self-conscious international working class will rise up and seize the fully developed means of production.All of this makes the proletariat into the revolutionary class.  They have no property, so they are not implicated in the system of private property.  And they are the great majority – nothing is something that everybody can have!  Read 482.    Where did this analysis go wrong?  WWI, Keynes, and the Income Pyramid.  Robert Paul Wolff:The willingness of French and German workers to march docilely into the trenches and slaughter one another demonstrated that the forces of “irrationality” -- nationality, race, religion, ethnicity -- are very much more resistant to dissolution than Marx thought. My grandfather and other American socialists were appalled by the failure of the workers of Europe to resist the capitalist war. Furthermore, when the predicted crash came, capitalists proved capable of working together to manage the gyrations of capitalism. Keynes and Roosevelt saved them from themselves. And the working class, rather than becoming homogenized, remained set in a pyramidal structure of wages and salaries that persists to the present day.CommunismOK, so that’s the revolutionary class: the proletarians.  How do we get from them to communism?  Communists are for proletarian as a whole, making them the political and social power.  To do this, they advocate abolishing bourgeois property, which is private property.  Key idea, again: there are different historical forms of property, and Marx is trying to get us to see that what we take for granted as the form of property doesn’t have to be that way.   Our version of private property really doesn’t depend on a personal right that some people have to property.  It is a social expectation that the capitalist gets to  keep for himself the products generated by others’ labor.   Not rooted in anything natural or in a personal right, but in a social set of legal and political conventions. These expectations can be changed.  It is possible to have a system of expectations where where everybody works enough to generate enough to go around, where the product of labor is not distributed by transforming into capital and private property that is sold on the market but instead “from each according to his ability, to each according to his needs.”  You would not think of your labor is going towards generating private capital, but into a collective fund over which nobody exercised private ownership but which everybody could use as needed (again, church analogy is probably the best, but maybe co-ops).  A truly human socialist society would organize itself so as to support and facilitate the natural life cycle of birth, childhood, maturity, old age, and death. In such a society, it would be understood that all men and women have productive roles to play in the society, and all have needs that it is the purpose of the economy to satisfy as well as possible. It would be understood that all human production, even that of the corporate magnate or the architect [pace Galt] or the artist, is fundamentally social and grounded in the historical and collective achievements of humanity. Everyone comes into a world that is already rich in history, technology, and conceptual resources. No one, American popular culture to the contrary notwithstanding, is a Self-Made Man. The labor of mothers is as crucial to the on-going well-being of humanity as the labor of farmers or craftspeople or corporate managers. Children have an appropriate role preparing themselves for productive labor, and the elderly, having lived productive lives, deserve a decent and fulfilling final stage of their particular enactment of the human life cycle.In such a society, the concept of unemployment has no appropriate place. Broad tolerance is desirable for the widest possible diversity of life trajectories, even for those trajectories that seem to reject the responsibilities that come with accepting the food, clothing, and shelter produced by others. But just as every Walton, from Grandpa and Grandma to the youngest child, can be expected in some way or other to contribute to that family's well-being, so in a socialist society there ought to be, and there is, a way for every person to make some contribution to the well-being of society.This might sound radical but anyway, it has already chaged for the proleterian – they live without property and in.  And much of life is already not private but social, like education.  Marx says push it all the way.  486-487.  Whatever resistance one might feel is an expression of still living in the capitalist dream world.  The ruling ideas are the ideas of the ruling class.  Spells out revolutionary program on p. 490.  Frightening.  I wouldn’t want to be around for it.  However, if you look at the concrete demands, most of them have actually come about and are totally conventional.Read closing, p. 500.  Say something about mixed legacy of Marx?  About need to make up your own minds about it?From Robert Paul Wolff:Briefly, he thought the following [I go into this in more detail in that paper]: First, capitalism will continue to evolve in the direction of larger and larger accumulations of capital; Second, progressively, the traditional hierarchical structure of the working class will be destroyed as more and more workers become semi-skilled machine operatives, thus facilitating class unity; Third, the corrosive rationalizing effect of capitalism will eat away at all ethnic, racial, national, religious and other forces that might tend to isolate capitals from one another and workers from one another; Fourth, ever greater booms and busts will afflict capitalism -- crises of over-production and under-consumption; Fifth, the dog eat dog competitiveness of capitalism will stop capitalists from cooperating to save capitalism from these periodic crises; Sixth, the rationalization and internationalization of capitalism on the side of capital will generate an ever more unified and international working class; and Seventh, there will finally come a world economic collapse from which no segment of capital is protected, in the wake of which the organized and more and more self-conscious international working class will rise up and seize the now fully developed forces and means of production.This was not a stupid analysis or series of projections, given the world Marx was looking at in the 1850s and 60s. Some of it he got right [the ever greater centralization of capital, the internationalization of capital.] He even correctly predicted a world-wide economic crash, although it came somewhat later than he expected. So what did he get wrong? Well, to put it in a nutshell, World War I, Keynes, and the Income Pyramid. WOLFF ALSO, ON SOCIALIST SOCIETY:But there never has been a socialist economy, the Soviet Union, China, and Cuba to the contrary notwithstanding, so we must at this point engage in genuine speculation. [I really do not want to have an argument about whether the Soviet Union and the People's Republic of China were ever socialist economies. Read my paper, "The Future of Socialism," for some insight. I am old, and tired, and I have had this argument too many times in my life. If you think they were socialist, because they said they were socialist, then you probably also think the Holy Roman Empire was holy, Roman, and an empire. In any case, you need to seek out another blog.]In a socialist society, the needs of the people, not of capital, are primary. Capital exists to serve the people; the people do not exist to serve capital. What is more, it is the needs of ALL of the people that are to be taken into account, not merely the needs of those people who serve the interests of capital accumulation.Almost certainly, a true socialist economy is not possible in one country surrounded by a world of capitalist countries, because when the forces of production and social relations of production have achieved a high level of development, as is now the case in the world, capital is thoroughly international in its organization and reach. It would be as futile to attempt to maintain an advanced socialist economy in one country as it would be to try to maintain one level of the water in the ocean while all around the rest of the water is at a different level.In a socialist polity, there will be vigorous debates and disputes about the best way to allocate and develop the society's resources and productive capabilities. Neither Economics nor Philosophy can provide objective, scientific answers to those questions. They are by their nature political, and are the appropriate subject for public argument. But in a socialist society, the wide disparities in wealth and income will disappear. No one will control vast accumulations of capital, and corporate managers [for there will of course have to be people who perform the functions of management] will not be permitted to use their positions of control to lavish on themselves rich rewards.In all previous social formations, the concepts people use to understand their social reality have been crafted, either consciously or otherwise, to serve the interests of the ruling portion of the society, to justify its rulership and to justify as well its appropriation of the lion's share of the available product. But in a true socialist society the people as a whole will rule, and the concepts they use to understand their social situation will not need to be mystified.    